15.90.010 General requirements.
(1) Reservation and designation of an area for off-street parking facilities shall be required for all land uses in accordance with the standards and requirements of this chapter.
(2) Lighting of areas provided for off-street parking shall be so arranged that it shall not constitute a nuisance or hazard to passing traffic or residential areas.
(3) All off-street parking spaces shall be accessible to a public or private street, but the spaces may not project into public street or right-of-way. Up to 50 percent of the required parking spaces may be compact size with dimensions 8-1/2 feet wide by 16 feet long. See off-street parking design standards/diagram at the end of this section.
(4) Any business in the industrial zone and all new construction and gas stations in the commercial zone having access to a public thoroughfare shall provide an off-street loading/unloading space.
(5) Parking facilities for residential dwellings of any type shall be located on the same property when located in a residential zone. Residential dwellings located in a commercial zone may take advantage of the exceptions set forth in LCMC 15.90.030 (3).
(6) Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, boats, or commercial vehicles shall not be parked on a public right-of-way longer than 72 hours and shall be subject to the following:
(a) Boats stored on land shall not be used for dwelling purposes.
(b) Recreation vehicles shall be used only for supplemental dwelling purposes. Dwelling use shall be limited to 30 days per year except as listed in subsection (6)(c) of this section.
(c) Recreational vehicles may be used as a dwelling, if a permanent dwelling is under construction on the lot, provided:
(i) A building permit for construction of a permanent dwelling has been issued.
(ii) Electrical connections have been inspected and approved by the State Electrical Inspector.
(iii) Use as a dwelling is discontinued when construction is completed, or within one year of issuance of the original building permit, whichever comes first.
(7) Two or more buildings and/or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking; provided, that the number of spaces provided is no less than the sum of the required spaces for the several individual uses computed separately. Collective parking is subject to the provisions of LCMC 15.90.030 (3)(c), wherein 50 percent of the required parking must be provided on-site. Collective parking may only be used when the buildings and/or uses are located immediately adjacent to each other. Legally binding documents between users shall be filed with and approved by the town.
(8) Screening shall be provided when a commercial, industrial or public parking property abuts a residential area.
(9) A minimum of one barrier-free parking space shall be provided on-site for new construction in all zones except residential in accordance with the requirements of the International Building Code (IBC) for Barrier-Free Facilities. Existing buildings in industrial and public use zones shall also provide barrier-free parking spaces as required by the IBC.
Off-Street Parking Design Standards
On-Site Driveway Standards
Notes:
1. Garage, carport and uncovered spaces with a wall on one or more sides shall be 10 feet by 18.5 feet. Unencumbered spaces may otherwise be 9 feet by 18.5 feet. Compact spaces shall be 8.5 feet by 16 feet.
[Ord. 1211 § 2(A), 2022; Ord. 963 § 6, 2005; Ord. 808 § 1, 2001; Ord. 685 § 2, 1996; Ord. 671 § 5.4.A, 1995.]

15.90.020 Off-street parking lots.
(1) All parking lots shall be improved with a minimum of two inches of gravel to eliminate problems of grading and drainage. All parking lots and driveways shall be impervious surface for purposes of computing maximum lot coverage.
(2) A parking lot shall be developed and completed as required in this code before an occupancy permit for the building is issued.
(3) Any ingress and egress agreements necessary for the functional use of a parking lot and/or loading area shall be executed by the respective property owners and recorded in the Skagit County auditor’s office. [Ord. 808 § 1, 2001; Ord. 671 § 5.4.B, 1995.]

15.90.030 Minimum off-street parking requirements.
Minimum off-street parking requirements shall be determined in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Residential.
(a) Single-family, manufactured houses, duplexes – Two per unit.
(b) Multifamily dwellings, apartments, condominiums – Two per unit.
(c) Bed and breakfast conditional use – One per room rental.
(d) Studio or one-bedroom multifamily dwellings, apartments, condominiums or accessory dwelling units – One per unit.
(2) Institutional.
(a) Hospitals, rest homes – One per three beds and one per staff.
(b) Senior housing and retirement homes – One per living unit and five per staff for each 60 living units or portion thereof.
(c) Elementary and middle schools – Two per classroom.
(d) High schools – Six per classroom.
(e) Auditoriums in conjunction with a school – One additional space per 100 square feet of floor area of the main auditorium, or portion thereof; or one additional space for each nine seats, or 18 feet of bench length, or portion thereof, whichever is greater.
(f) Day care/nurseries – one per full-time employee and one per load/unload area.
(3) Commercial.
(a) Any new construction or change in use shall comply with the off-street parking requirements set forth in this chapter, except that the property owner may pay a fee into the parking improvement fund in lieu of furnishing the required parking spaces that the owner does not or cannot provide on site with the exception of hotels, motels, boarding houses, and bed and breakfasts, which must provide on-site facilities. The in-lieu-of fee may be used for up to 50 percent of the on-site parking requirements, pursuant to subsections (3)(d) and (3)(f) of this section.
(b) Deleted by Ord. 842.
(c) Adequate parking shall be provided as follows:
(i) Banks, offices and professional services: one per 400 square feet of floor area or portion thereof.
(ii) Retail and specialty shops, food and convenience stores: one per 400 square feet of usable retail floor area.
(iii) Storage and processing areas in conjunction with a commercial use: one per 1,000 square feet.
(iv) Hotels, motels, boarding houses, bed and breakfasts: one per each paid unit plus one per on-site manager.
(v) Eating and drinking establishments: one per 200 square feet of net floor area, or portion thereof.
(vi) All new construction in commercial zones shall provide a minimum of one barrier-free parking space on-site, and provide a loading area for passengers and/or freight.
(vii) Each residential unit in commercial zones shall provide one space for the first 1,200 square feet of the unit, and one additional space is required if the unit is larger than 1,200 square feet.
(viii) Fractional space requirements shall be rounded to the nearest whole space.
(ix) Requirements for uses not specifically listed herein shall be determined by the planning director based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the use. The planning director shall use this section as a guide when appropriate.
(x) In-lieu parking fees will not be made available to areas that are zoned residential.
(d) The parking requirements for a business use in a commercial zone shall be satisfied by providing the necessary parking on site. Up to 50 percent of the required parking may be provided off site or by the payment of an in-lieu parking fee. For interpretive purposes, existing business shall be credited parking for existing conditions. The 50 percent rule shall apply to the combination of the new parking requirement plus existing parking credit. For properties located on the west side of South First Street and located south of the intersection of Washington Street, 100 percent of required parking shall be provided by payment of an in-lieu parking fee, as set forth in this section. No on-site parking shall be permitted on these properties.
(e) For existing structures which do not meet the above parking requirements, an annual fee shall be paid for each space required, but not provided, as may be established by town council in the fee ordinance. This sum shall be paid to the clerk-treasurer on or before January 10th of each year, in conjunction with business license fees, no proration. These moneys shall be deposited and utilized in the town parking improvement fund.
(f) If a reduction in barrier free parking requirements of this code is proposed by an applicant, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed reduction assures continued compliance with state and federal requirements related to barrier free parking.
(g) The in-lieu parking fee shall be as the town council shall set by ordinance or resolution. Deferral of payments may be made by agreement of the town council for public uses.
(h) The in-lieu parking fee shall be based on the following conditions:
(i) The fee shall be based on all anticipated costs as established in subsection (3)(h)(ii) of this section, and as recorded in the fee schedule. This amount may be amended from time to time. The amount of the fee shall be established annually by the town council with the advice of the town’s public works director and planning director based on the current prices for purchase of land and construction of off-street parking spaces or rental fee for each required space.
(ii) The fees collected by the town shall be used for planning, acquisition, design, development, construction, financing, maintenance and operation, and enhancement of off-street parking facilities, and/or other programs intended to provide an appropriate supply and/or lessen the demand for parking spaces to serve the downtown business area.
(iii) The fee shall be paid before a building permit is issued.
(iv) In-lieu parking fees will not be made available to areas that are zoned or used for residential purposes.
(i) This regulation shall not be construed so as to preclude the imposition of a parking impact fee in the future, should the town council decide to do so. This fee should be based on the acquisition cost of additional parking facilities that would be needed to offset the impact of the new development.
(j) Parking Fund. There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the parking improvement fund. All payments made to the town in lieu of parking requirements on site shall be deposited into such fund, upon receipt. The fund shall be used exclusively for planning, acquisition, design, development, construction, financing, maintenance and operation, and enhancement of off-street parking facilities, and/or other programs intended to provide an appropriate supply and/or lessen the demand for parking spaces to serve the downtown business area. These goals should be consistent with the project priorities set forth in the parking development plan as adopted by the town council.
(k) Parking Exemption. In the event the town develops a street-end park or similar pedestrian-oriented area in an existing public right-of-way that prevents adequate access to or reduce turn-around space for off-street parking required of an adjacent property owner by code, such adjacent property owner may request a reduction of their off-street parking requirement by the number of off-street parking places for which access or safe turn-around space has been prevented.
Any approved development of property previously used for off-street parking but eliminated by town development will not be subject to the off-street parking or fee in-lieu-of requirements.
This exemption does not apply to any property owner whose existing property does not or has not met off-street parking requirements.
(4) Amusement and Public Assembly.
(a) Churches and funeral homes – One per each 100 square feet, or portion thereof, of assembly area;
(b) Dance halls, places of assembly, skating rinks, and other commercial recreation places – One per each 100 square feet, or portion thereof, of assembly area;
(c) Athletic and health clubs – One per 200 square feet, or portion thereof, of exercise area;
(d) Stadiums, sports arenas, auditoriums, and places of assembly with fixed seating – One per three seats;
(e) Outdoor sports or parks without fixed seats are exempt;
(f) Exhibition halls, museums or libraries – One per 250 square feet or portion thereof.
(5) Industrial, Manufacturing and Processing.
(a) One for each employee on largest shift or one per each 600 square feet up to 25,000 square feet of gross area and one for each 1,000 square feet over 25,000 square feet of gross area, whichever is greater;
(b) Offices – one per 300 square feet gross floor area or portion thereof.
(6) Wholesale Stores, Warehouses, and Storage Buildings.
(a) Zero to 24,999 square feet – One per 2,000 square feet;
(b) 25,000 square feet and over – One per 5,000 square feet.
(7) Boat moorage, slip, or storage (public, private or pleasure) – One-half space per slip, excluding transient moorage.
(8) Requirements for uses not specifically listed herein shall be determined by the planning director based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the use. The planning director shall use this section as a guide when appropriate. [Ord. 1211 § 2(A), 2022; Ord. 1126 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1122 § 2, 2014; Ord. 918 § 1, 2004; Ord. 884 § 2, 2003; Ord. 852, 2002; Ord. 842 §§ 15, 17, 18, 19, 2002; Ord. 808 § 1, 2001; Ord. 791, 2000; Ord. 697 § 1, 1997; Ord. 671 § 5.4.C, 1995.]

15.90.040 Screening requirements.
The size of the planting area shall be as specified below, based on the type of screening used:
(1) Minimum Width. Screening shall be 10 feet wide unless the use of a fence or wall is incorporated into the screening, as provided under subsections (2) or (3) of this section.
(2) Fence Alternative. If a fence option is selected, the height shall be at least five feet and the width of the screening area may be reduced to two feet. The fence shall be constructed of wood and be sight-obscuring.
(3) Wall Alternative. If a wall at least five feet high is to be used for screening, the width of the screening area may be reduced to two feet. Climbing plants and vines shall be used to add texture and soften the appearance of the wall. Screen walls shall be constructed with masonry, blocks, or textured concrete, subject to design approval by the planner or planning commission. [Ord. 808 § 1, 2001; Ord. 671 § 5.4.D, 1995.]