14.05.010 Title.
This chapter shall be called "Surface Water Management."
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.020 Application.
This chapter applies to:
A. All grading, drainage, and erosion control, whether or not a permit is required; and
B. All new development, redevelopment, land disturbing activities, and construction sites,
whether or not a permit is required; and
C. All new and existing discharges directly or indirectly to a public drainage control system;
and
D. All new and existing land uses.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.030 Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its remedial purposes,
which are:
A. To protect, to the greatest extent practical, life, property and the environment from loss,
injury and damage by pollution, erosion, flooding, landslides, strong ground motion, soil
liquefaction, accelerated soil creep, settlement and subsidence, and other potential hazards
whether from natural causes or from human activity;
B. To protect the public interest in drainage and related functions of drainage basins,
watercourses and shoreline areas;
C. To protect surface waters, ground waters and other receiving waters from pollution,
mechanical damage, excessive flows and other conditions in their drainage basins which
will increase the rate of downcutting, streambank erosion, and/or the degree of turbidity,
siltation and other forms of pollution, or which will reduce their low flows or low levels to
levels which degrade the environment, reduce recharging and ground water, or endanger
aquatic and benthic life within these surface waters and receiving waters of the state;
D. To meet the requirements of state and federal law and comply with regulatory standards for
the city's municipal storm water; and
E. To fulfill the responsibilities of the city as trustee of the environment for future generations.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)
§ 14.05.040 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.05.050

14.05.040 Authority.
This chapter is authorized by the provisions of chapters 35A.63 and 36.70A RCW, the Western
Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit and other applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.050 Authority of the public works director/city engineer.
A. The public works director is authorized to issue, monitor, stop work or require
modifications of storm water permits and inspections for the construction, capping,
alterations, or repairs of privately owned and operated drainage control systems as more
specifically set forth in BMC § 14.05.120; require modification of drainage control
facilities and associated project designs during construction and approve and file approved
drainage control plans as more specifically set forth in BMC § 14.05.130; and accept and
approve when appropriate storm sewer permits for the construction or alteration of all
storm water systems as more specifically set forth in BMC § 14.05.240. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the public works director may be delegated to persons or
entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
B. The public works director is authorized to take actions necessary to implement the
provisions and purposes of this title in their respective spheres of authority, including, but
not limited to: promulgating and amending rules and regulations, which may include
prescribing best management practices ("BMPs"); establishing and conducting inspection
programs; establishing and conducting or, as set forth in BMC § 14.05.070, requiring
responsible parties to conduct monitoring programs, which may include sampling of
discharges to or from drainage control facilities, the public drainage control system, or
surface water; taking enforcement action; abating nuisances; promulgating guidance and
policy documents under this title. The public works director shall also have the authority to
review and approve or disapprove required submittals and applications for approvals and
permits as set forth in this title. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the public
works director may be delegated to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or
in the employ of the agency as designated by the public works director.
The public works director is further authorized to develop drainage basin plans for
managing surface water, drainage water, and erosion within individual subbasins.
Compliance with an adopted drainage basin plan may, when approved by the public works
director, modify requirements of this title, provided the level of protection for human
health, safety, and welfare, the environment, and public or private property will equal or
exceed that which would otherwise be achieved.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)
§ 14.05.060 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.05.070
Part II
Storm Water, Drainage And Erosion Control

14.05.060 Scope.
BMC § 14.05.060 through 14.05.130 are applicable to:
A. General. All new and existing discharges subject to this title as set forth in BMC
§ 14.05.030, all land uses and all new development, redevelopment, and grading shall
comply with all requirements of this title unless explicitly exempted by this title or
exempted by the public works director pursuant to the authority granted in BMC
§ 14.05.050 and as specifically set forth in this chapter.
B. Exemptions. The following land uses are exempt from the provisions of this title.
1. Commercial agriculture, including only those activities conducted on lands defined in
RCW 84.34.020(2), and production of crops or livestock for wholesale trade;
2. Forest practices regulated under WAC Title 222, except for Class IV general forest
practices, as defined in WAC 222-16-050, that are conversions from timber land to
other uses;
3. Development undertaken by the Washington State Department of Transportation in
state highway right-of-way that complies with the standards found in chapter 173-270
WAC, the Puget Sound Highway Runoff Program; and
4. Any additional exemptions as set forth in Appendix 1, Minimum Technical
Requirements for New Development and Redevelopment, of the Western Washington
Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.070 Prohibited discharges.
A. Storm Water Discharges to Sanitary and Combined Sewers. In consultation with the local
sewage treatment agency, the public works director may approve discharges of storm water
to a public combined sewer or sanitary sewer if other methods of controlling pollutants in
the discharge are not adequate or reasonable, and the discharging party certifies that the
discharge will not harm the environment and will not overburden or otherwise harm the
public combined sewer or sanitary sewer systems. The public works director shall
condition approval of such a discharge on compliance with local pretreatment regulations.
B. Discharges Prohibited to Public Drainage Control Systems. No person shall throw, drain,
or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise
discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants other than storm
water. It is unlawful to make illicit discharges, as defined in subsection (C) of this section,
either directly or indirectly to a public drainage control system.
C. Illicit Discharges Defined. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, all
discharges which are not composed entirely of storm water are illicit discharges, as defined
in BMC § 14.01.060.
The following is a partial list, provided for informational purposes only, of common
substances which are illicit discharges when allowed to enter a public drainage control
§ 14.05.070 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.05.070
system:
1. Trash or debris.
2. Construction materials.
3. Petroleum products including but not limited to oil, gasoline, grease, fuel oil, and
heating oil.
4. Antifreeze and other automotive products.
5. Metals in either particulate or dissolved form.
6. Flammable or explosive materials.
7. Radioactive material.
8. Batteries.
9. Acids, alkalis or bases.
10. Paints, stains, resins, lacquers or varnishes.
11. Degreasers and solvents.
12. Drain cleaners.
13. Pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers.
14. Steam cleaning wastes.
15. Soaps, detergents or ammonia.
16. Swimming pool backwash.
17. Chlorine, bromine and other disinfectants.
18. Heated water.
19. Domestic animal wastes.
20. Sewage.
21. Recreational vehicle waste.
22. Animal carcasses.
23. Food wastes.
24. Bark and other fibrous materials.
25. Collected lawn clippings, leaves, or branches.
26. Silt, sediment or gravel.
27. Dyes.
28. Chemicals not normally found in uncontaminated water.
29. Washing of fresh concrete for cleaning and/or finishing purposes or to expose
aggregates.
30. Any other process-associated discharge except as otherwise allowed in this section.
31. Any hazardous material or waste not listed above.
D. Allowable Discharges. The following types of discharges shall not be considered illegal
discharges for the purposes of this chapter unless the public works director determines that
the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing or is likely
to cause pollution of surface water or ground water:
1. Diverted stream flows.
2. Rising ground water.
3. Uncontaminated ground water infiltration.
4. Uncontaminated pumped ground water.
5. Foundation drains.
6. Air conditioning condensation.
7. Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is commingled with urban storm water.
8. Springs.
9. Water from crawlspace pumps.
10. Footing drains.
11. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
12. Non-storm water discharges authorized by another NPDES or state waste discharge
permit.
13. Discharges from emergency firefighting activities.
E. Conditional Discharges. The following types of discharges shall not be considered illegal
discharges for the purposes of this chapter if they meet the stated conditions, or unless the
public works director determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in
combination with others, is causing or is likely to cause pollution of surface water or
ground water:
1. Potable water, including water from water line flushing, hyperchlorinated water line
flushing, fire hydrant system flushing, and pipeline hydrostatic test water. Planned
discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted
if necessary, and in volumes and velocities controlled to prevent resuspension of
sediments in the storm water system;
2. Lawn watering and other irrigation runoff is permitted but shall be minimized;
3. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges. These discharges shall be dechlorinated to
a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted if necessary, and in volumes and
velocities controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the storm water system.
§ 14.05.070 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.05.080
Discharges shall be thermally controlled to prevent an increase in temperature of the
receiving water;
4. Street and sidewalk wash water, water used to control dust, and routine external
building wash down that does not use detergents are permitted if the amount of street
wash and dust control water used is minimized. At active construction sites, street
sweeping must be performed prior to washing the street;
5. Other non-storm water discharges. The discharges shall be in compliance with the
requirements of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) reviewed and
approved by the city, which addresses control of such discharges by applying
AKART to prevent contaminants from entering surface or ground water.
F. Testing for Illicit Discharges. When the public works director has reason to believe that
any discharge is an illicit discharge, the public works director or designee may sample and
analyze the discharge and recover the costs from a responsible party in an enforcement
proceeding. When the discharge is likely to contain illicit discharges on a recurring basis,
the public works director may conduct, or may require the responsible party to conduct,
ongoing monitoring at the responsible party's expense.
G. Illicit Connections Prohibited. Any connection identified by the public works director that
could convey anything not composed entirely of surface and storm water directly to surface
and storm water or ground water is considered an illicit connection. The construction, use,
maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is
prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made
in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person is considered to be in violation
of this section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such a
connection to continue.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.080 Requirements for existing discharges and land uses.
A. General. For all existing discharges directly or indirectly to a public drainage control
system, responsible parties shall implement and maintain nonstructural best management
practices as specified in rules promulgated by the public works director. Nonstructural best
management practices shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance and source control
housekeeping practices such as cleaning of catch basins and detention facilities, sweeping
of parking lots, storing oil barrels and other contaminant sources out of the rain, covering
material stockpiles, and proper use and storage of hazardous materials.
If the public works director or designee determines that discharges from a drainage facility
are causing or contributing to a water quality problem, such as discharges that cannot
be adequately addressed by nonstructural best management practices, including, but not
limited to, areas with recurrent spills such as discharges from vehicle maintenance shops
or gas stations, then the director may require the responsible party to undertake more
stringent or additional best management practices. These best management practices may
include structural best management practices or other action necessary to cease causing or
contributing to the water quality problem. Structural best management practices include but
shall not be limited to constructed facilities such as detention tanks, wet ponds, oil/water
separators, grassed swales, roofing and berming of container storage areas, and revised
piping systems.
B. Spill Prevention Required. All responsible parties shall take measures to prevent spills or
other accidental introduction of illicit discharges into a public drainage control system.
Such measures shall include:
1. Establishment and implementation of plans and procedures to prevent spills and other
accidental releases of materials that may contaminate storm water;
2. Implementation of procedures for immediate containment and other appropriate
action regarding spills and other accidental releases to prevent contamination of storm
water; and
3. Provision of necessary containment and response equipment on site, and training of
personnel regarding the procedures and equipment to be used.
The provisions of this subsection may be satisfied by a storm water pollution
prevention plan prepared in compliance with the NPDES industrial storm water
permit for the site.
The responsible parties shall make the plans and procedures required by this
subsection available to the public works director or designee when requested.
C. Release Notification Requirements. A responsible party must, at the earliest possible time,
but in any case within 24 hours of discovery, report to the public works department a spill,
release, dumping, or other situation that has contributed or is likely to contribute pollutants
to a public drainage control system. This reporting requirement is in addition to, and not
instead of, any other reporting requirements under federal, state or local laws.
D. Natural Drainage Patterns. Natural drainage patterns shall be maintained.
E. Obstruction of Watercourses. Every person owning property through which a watercourse
passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, sediment, and other obstacles that
would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned
structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that such structures will not become a
hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. Watercourses shall not
be obstructed.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.090 Storm water, drainage, and erosion control requirements.
A. Stormwater Management Manual Adopted. The city of Burlington hereby adopts as a
technical reference manual, hereafter referred to as the "storm water manual," the 2019
State Department of Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington,
as amended by Sections 1 through 7 of Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II
Municipal Stormwater Permit. The city hereby further adopts the thresholds, definitions,
minimum requirements, and exceptions, adjustments and variance criteria found in
Appendix 1 and Appendix 10 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater
Permit as the city of Burlington's minimum storm water regulations.
B. Thresholds for Minimum Technical Requirements for Storm Water Control.
§ 14.05.090 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.05.100
1. All new development, redevelopment, and construction sites, regardless of type and
regardless of whether or not a permit is required, that meet or exceed the threshold
conditions set forth in Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal
Stormwater Permit must comply with the minimum technical requirements of said
Appendix 1, including the mandatory incorporated provisions of the 2019 Ecology
Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington.
2. The city of Burlington requires that all projects, even those that result in land
disturbance of less than one acre, adhere to the minimum requirements for erosion
and storm water control set forth in Appendix 1 and Appendix 7 of the Western
Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit.
3. For those projects meeting the review thresholds set forth in this section, the applicant
shall submit a site assessment and analysis along with a drainage control plan or storm
water site plan pursuant to requirements in Appendix 1 of the Western Washington
Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit.
4. The city of Burlington allows applications for an erosivity waiver as specified in
Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit.
C. Standards and Definitions. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all standards,
definitions, and requirements shall be in accordance with the storm water manual.
D. Flood Prone Areas. Sites within flood prone areas must employ measures to minimize the
potential for flooding on the site and for the project to increase the risk of floods on adjacent
or nearby properties. Flood control measures shall include those set forth in other titles of
the Burlington Municipal Code and rules promulgated thereunder, including but not limited
to the critical areas code, chapter 14.15 BMC, and in rules promulgated by the public works
director to meet the purposes of this subsection.
E. Natural Drainage Patterns. Natural drainage patterns shall be maintained.
F. Obstruction of Watercourses. Watercourses shall not be obstructed.
G. Low Impact Development. The city requires a site analysis and technical evaluation to
ensure that all sites meeting the minimum qualifications shall utilize low impact
development (LID) best management practices (BMPs), as an alternative to conventional
storm water management systems that rely on detention ponds and closed conveyances,
when such measures are feasible. Low impact development is intended to manage runoff
close to the source of generation and to mimic predeveloped hydrologic condition of a site.
Low impact development is accomplished through minimizing the impervious surface
coverage and loss of vegetation and by managing runoff through dispersion, infiltration,
evapotranspiration, or a combination of these approaches. Use of LID BMPs may reduce
or eliminate the need for conventional detention facilities but does not remove the
obligation to comply with the minimum requirements of the storm water manual. A variety
of BMPs to minimize impervious surfaces and to manage storm water have been developed
and tested for use in Western Washington.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1921 § 1 (Exh. A), 2022)

14.05.100 Scope of drainage control review and application requirements.
A. Scope of Review. Where drainage and approval are required by BMC § 14.05.090, the
scope of this review shall at least include the following:
1. Applications for Building and Other Permits. The public works director shall review
any application for a building permit or other permit, other than land use permit
applications, for compliance with BMC § 14.05.090 and to determine whether
improvements to the public drainage control system shall be required.
2. The public works director shall review all storm water plans for proposed
development activities in accordance with the site planning process and best
management practice selection and design criteria as set forth in the storm water
manual.
B. Application and Approval Requirements. Drainage control plans for projects subject to
review under BMC § 14.05.090 shall be reviewed by the public works director or designee.
The public works director or designee may approve those plans which comply with the
provisions of this title and rules promulgated hereunder, and may place conditions upon the
approval in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this title. Submission of the
required drainage control application information shall be a condition precedent to the
processing of any of the above-listed permits. Approval of drainage control shall be a
condition precedent to issuance of any of the above-listed permits. A storm sewer permit
shall be issued to construct on-site and off-site drainage control facilities based on the
approved plans. See BMC § 14.05.240, Storm sewer permits required.
The public works director may disapprove plans which do not comply with the provisions
of this title and rules promulgated hereunder. Disapproved plans shall be returned to the
applicant, who may correct and resubmit the plans.
C. Submittal Requirements.
1. Applications shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with provisions of this
section, with this chapter (public storm sewers) and with associated rules and
regulations adopted by the public works director.
2. The public works director or designee may require additional information necessary
to adequately evaluate applications for compliance with the requirements and
purposes of this title and other laws and regulations, including the critical areas code,
chapter 14.15 BMC. The public works director or designee may also require
appropriate information about adjoining properties which may be related to, or
affected by, the drainage control proposal in order to evaluate effects on the adjacent
property. This additional information may be required as a precondition for permit
application review and approval.
3. Where an applicant simultaneously applies for more than one of the permits listed in
subsection (A) of this section for the same property, the application shall comply with
the requirements for the permit which are the most detailed and complete.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.110 Drainage control plan registry.
The public works director shall maintain a permanent file of all approved drainage control plans.
Each plan shall be cataloged according to the property address, legal description of the property
and the storm sewer permit number for which the plan is required. See BMC § 14.05.240,
§ 14.05.110 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.05.130
Storm sewer permits required. Where a drainage control plan covers more than one property, the
approved plan shall be cataloged for each property covered by the plan.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.120 Installation of drainage control facilities.
All privately owned and operated drainage control facilities or systems, whether or not they
discharge to a public drainage control system, shall be considered storm sewers and shall be
subject to this title, the public works department director's rules promulgated under this title, and
the public works department's design and installation specifications and permit requirements for
storm sewer and drainage control systems.
Storm sewer permits and inspections shall be required for construction, capping, alterations, or
repairs of privately owned and operated drainage control systems as provided in this title. When
the work is ready for inspection, the permittee shall notify the public works director. If the work
is not in accordance with plans approved under this title and in accordance with the department
of community development design and installation specifications adopted by administrative rule,
the public works director may order the work stopped by written notice to the persons engaged in
performing the work or causing the work to be done, and may require modifications as provided
in this title.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.130 Modifications of drainage control facilities during construction.
During construction the public works director may require, or the applicant may request, that the
construction of drainage control facilities and associated project designs be modified if physical
conditions are discovered on the site which are inconsistent with the assumptions upon which
the approval was based, including but not limited to unexpected soil and/or water conditions,
weather-generated problems, or changes in the design of the improved areas. Modifications shall
be submitted to the public works director for approval prior to implementation.
Any such modifications made during the construction of drainage control facilities shall be
recorded on the final approved drainage control plan, a revised copy of which shall be filed by
the community development director.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)
§ 14.05.140 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.05.170
Part III
Storm Water And Surface Water Inspection And Maintenance

14.05.140 Scope.
BMC § 14.05.140 through 14.05.200 are intended to:
A. Provide for the inspection and regulation of public or private storm and surface water
system control or detention facilities in order to provide for a properly functioning city
storm and surface water drainage system and to protect the public health, safety and
welfare;
B. Authorize the storm and surface water utility to inspect storm and surface water system
control and drainage control facilities and to require owners of such systems to maintain,
operate and repair such systems in conformity with the code and the utility standards and
regulations; and
C. Authorize the storm and surface water utility to investigate the source of suspected illicit
discharges, dumping, and/or illicit connections.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.150 Compliance.
Each owner or person responsible for the maintenance, operation or repair of detention facilities
within the city shall maintain, operate and repair said detention facilities in compliance with the
requirements of this code and in compliance with the utility standards and regulations.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.160 Responsibility for inspection and maintenance.
Drainage control facilities required by this title and by the rules adopted hereunder shall be
maintained by the owner or other responsible party. The owner or responsible party shall inspect
permanent drainage control facilities at least annually, and shall inspect temporary drainage
control facilities and other temporary best management practices or facilities on a schedule
sufficient for the facilities to function at design capacity. When an inspection identifies a need
for maintenance as defined by standards found in chapter 4 of Volume V of the storm water
manual, maintenance shall be performed in accordance with the following schedule:
A. Within one year for typical maintenance of facilities, except catch basins.
B. Within six months for catch basins.
C. Within two years for maintenance that requires capital construction of less than $25,000.
The public works director may require the responsible party to conduct more frequent
inspections and/or maintenance when necessary to ensure functioning at design capacity.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.170 Inspection program.
The public works director shall establish inspection programs to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this title and accomplishment of its purposes. Inspection programs may be
established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections; random
§ 14.05.170 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.05.180
inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspections
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other
contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with
higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment
quality standards; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental
or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and
repair records; visual inspection of catch basins and detention/retention ponds; video inspection
of pipe system; sampling discharges, surface water, ground water, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other
best management practices.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.180 Entry for inspection and abatement purposes.
A. New Installations and Connections. When any new drainage control facility is installed on
private property, and when any new connection is made between private property and a
public drainage control system, or sanitary sewer, the property owner shall obtain approval
from the public works director. The property owner shall grant the city the right to enter
the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner pursuant to an inspection
program established pursuant to BMC § 14.05.170, and to enter the property when the city
has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this title is occurring or has occurred,
and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation
of this title.
B. The public works director or designee, whenever implementing the provisions of the
utility's inspection program or whenever he/she has cause to believe that a violation of this
code or the utility standards and regulations has been or is being committed, is authorized
to inspect during regular working hours and at other reasonable times all drainage control
facilities within the city to determine compliance with the provisions of this code and the
utility standards and regulations. If a property owner has not granted right of entry under
subsection (A) of this section, prior to making any inspection the director shall present
identification credentials, state the reason for the inspection, and request entry.
1. If said property or any building or structure on said property is unoccupied, he/she
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person(s) having
charge or control of the property or portion thereof and request entry.
2. If, after reasonable effort, the public works director or designee is unable to locate the
owner or such other person(s) having charge or control of the property, and he/she
has reason to believe the condition of the detention facility creates an imminent
hazard to persons or property, he/she may make entry.
3. Unless entry is consented to by the owner or person(s) in control of said property or
portion thereof or unless conditions are reasonably believed to exist which create an
imminent hazard, the public works director, prior to entry, shall obtain a search
warrant as authorized by the laws of the state.
4. The public works director or designee may inspect the drainage control facility
without obtaining a search warrant pursuant to subsection (B)(3) of this section if said
inspection can be conducted while he/she remains on public property or on other
property on which he/she has permission to be.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.190 Disposal of waste from maintenance activities.
Disposal of waste from maintenance of drainage and storm water control facilities shall be
conducted in accordance with federal, state and local regulations, including the minimum
functional standards for solid waste handling, chapter 173-304 WAC, guidelines for disposal of
waste materials, and, where appropriate, dangerous waste regulations, chapter 173-303 WAC,
including any subsequent amendments to these provisions.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.200 Records of installation and maintenance activities.
When a new drainage control facility is installed, the party having the facility installed shall
obtain a copy of the as-built plans from the public works director. Responsible parties shall
make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repair and shall retain the records
for at least 10 years. These records shall be made available to the public works director during
inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request of the public works director.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.210 Exceptions to requirements.
A. General. The purpose of this chapter is to administer and enforce all requirements set forth
in this title. Requests for exceptions to the requirements of this title shall be made according
to this section and Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater
Permit, Section 6. Exceptions shall include alternative requirements, waivers, reductions,
or modifications of the requirements. An exception shall only be granted to the extent
necessary to meet the criteria set forth in this section. An applicant is not entitled to an
exception, whether or not the criteria allowing approval of an exception are met. The
director may require an applicant to submit an engineer's report or analysis with a request
for an exception. When an exception is granted, the director may impose new or additional
requirements to offset or mitigate harm that may be caused by granting the exception, or
that would have been prevented if the exception had not been granted.
B. Public Notice. Public notice of an application for an exception under the criteria set forth
in this section shall comply with Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II
Municipal Stormwater Permit, Section 6.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)
§ 14.05.220 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.05.230
Part IV
Public Storm Sewers

14.05.220 Plans required.
Storm sewers and drainage improvements shall require a storm sewer permit with approved
engineering plans with the following information:
A. Plan map properly dimensioned and drawn to scale showing the location of the proposed
storm sewer, drainage ditches and sewer appurtenances within the street right-of-way.
Sewers and drainage ditches shall be stationed and all manholes, catch basins, and
appurtenances shall be numbered;
B. Location of existing above and below ground utilities in road right-of-way or adjacent
easements;
C. Location and dimensions of utility and drainage easements and location of all existing
watercourses, ditches, trunk storm sewers, ponds and retention facilities connected with or
adjacent to the proposed drainage facilities;
D. Profiles of storm drains and drainage ditches with the following information:
1. Location and number of all manholes, catch basins and appurtenances,
2. Profile of existing and proposed ground surface and storm drain,
3. Size, slope and length of storm sewers between consecutive manholes, and
4. Sewer, manhole, and catch basin invert elevations;
E. Suitable title plate on each drawing with street or sewer name, name and address of the
developer, scale, date and the name, address and telephone number and stamp of the
registered engineer responsible for the plan preparation;
F. Structural details of any special manholes, catch basins, and appurtenances including drop
manholes, retention control manholes, outlet structures, pumping stations, diversion
structures, etc.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.230 Design criteria.
A. Storm sewers and drainage facilities shall be designed for a projected life span of 30 years
without excessive maintenance. All trunk sewers and collector sewers shall be designed
and stamped by a civil engineer registered in the state of Washington unless otherwise
approved by the public works director. Accepted engineering practices shall be employed
in the design of all drainage facilities.
B. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed per specifications in the storm water manual.
All drainage facilities in public rights-of-way or easements shall have an outfall into an
approved drainage system.
C. The minimum requirements for storm drainage facilities shall be as follows:
1. Catch basins or inlets shall be spaced a maximum of 200 feet apart along any street,
alley or avenue;
2. The minimum catch basin lateral pipe size shall be 12 inches in diameter and the
minimum storm main size shall be 12 inches in diameter;
3. Manholes on trunk sewers shall have a maximum spacing of 400 feet; and
4. Construction materials and methods shall be in accordance with Standards and
Specifications for Municipal Public Works Construction prepared by the American
Public Works Association, latest edition.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.240 Storm sewer permits required.
A. A storm sewer permit shall be obtained for the construction or alteration of all storm sewer
systems, including on-site and off-site installations. Applications for storm sewer permits
shall be processed as Type I decisions in accordance with the provisions of BMC Title 14A.
B. To obtain a storm sewer permit, an application shall be filed with the community
development department. Applications for storm sewer permit approval shall be made on
forms provided by the community development director and shall include all of the
information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only
applications including all of the information required by this section shall be deemed
complete for purposes of complying with BMC Title 14A. A complete application shall
include:
1. A detailed description of the work to be covered by the permit;
2. A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and
definitely locate the proposed project or work;
3. Any plans, diagrams, computations and specifications, or other data as required in this
title;
4. Any applicable fees in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city
council; and
5. Applications must be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent.
C. The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for
a permit shall be reviewed by the public works director. Such plans may be reviewed by
other departments of this jurisdiction to verify compliance with any applicable laws under
their jurisdiction. If the public works director finds that the work described in an application
for a permit and the plans, specifications, and other data filed therewith conform to the
requirements of this title and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees specified
in the current fee resolution have been paid, the public works director shall issue a permit
therefor to the applicant.
When the public works director issues the permit where plans are required, the public
works director shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications
"APPROVED." Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or
altered without authorization from the public works director, and all work regulated by this
§ 14.05.240 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.05.260
title shall be in accordance with the approved plans.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.250 Fees.
Fees for drainage control plan review, recordkeeping or other activities pursuant to this title
shall, unless otherwise provided for in this title, be prescribed by resolution.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.260 Financial assurance and covenants.
As a condition precedent to issuance of any permit or approval provided for in this title, the
director may require an applicant for a permit or approval to submit financial assurances as
provided in this section.
A. Insurance.
1. The director may require the owner(s), or contractor to carry liability and property
damage insurance against damage, naming the city as an additional insured. The
amount shall be commensurate with the risks as determined by the director.
2. The director may also require the owner(s) to maintain a policy of general public
liability insurance against personal injury, death, property damage and/or loss from
activities conducted pursuant to the permit or approval, or conditions caused by such
activities, and naming the city as an additional insured. The policy shall be in an
amount which the director determines to be commensurate with the risks. It shall
cover a period of not more than 10 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or finalization of the permit or approval. A certificate evidencing such
insurance shall be filed with the director before issuance of a certificate of occupancy
or finalization of a permit for any single-family dwelling or duplex.
3. The insurance policy shall provide that the city will be notified of cancellation of the
policy at least 30 days prior to cancellation. The notice shall be sent to the director
who required the insurance and shall state the insured's name and the property
address. If a property owner's insurance is canceled and not replaced, the permit or
approval and any interrelated permit or approval may be revoked, including a
certificate of occupancy or approval for occupancy.
B. Bonds, Cash Deposits or Instruments of Credit.
1. Surety Bond. The director may require that the owner or contractor deliver to the
director for filing in the office of the city clerk a surety bond, cash deposit or an
instrument of credit in such form and amounts deemed by the director to be necessary
to ensure that requirements of the permit or approval are met. A surety bond may be
furnished only by a surety company licensed to do business in the state of
Washington. The bond shall be conditioned that the work will be completed in
accordance with the conditions of the permit or approval, or, if the work is not
completed, that the site will be restored if damaged or made unsafe by activities
conducted pursuant to the permit or approval.
The bond will be exonerated one year after a determination by the director that the
requirements of the permit or approval have been met.
For work under a building permit, issuance of a certificate of occupancy or approval
for occupancy following a final inspection shall be considered to be such a
determination. For grading, completion of the final grading inspection and submittal
of required final reports in accordance with BMC § 14.05.240 shall be such a
determination.
2. Assurance in Lieu of Surety Bond. In lieu of a surety bond, the owner may elect to
file a cash deposit or instrument of credit with the director in an amount equal to that
which would be required in the surety bond and in a form approved by the director.
The cash deposit or instrument of credit shall comply with the same conditions as
required for surety bonds.
C. Covenants.
1. The director may require a covenant between the owner(s) of the property and the
city. The covenant shall be signed by the owner(s) of the site and notarized prior to
issuance of any permit or approval in a potential landslide area, potentially hazardous
location, flood prone zone, or other area of potentially hazardous soils or drainage or
erosion conditions. The covenant shall not be required where the permit or approval
is for work done by the city. The covenant shall include:
a. A legal description of the property; and
b. A description of the property condition making this subsection applicable; and
c. A statement that the owner(s) of the property understands and accepts the
responsibility for the risks associated with development on the property given
the described condition, and agrees to inform future purchasers and other
successors and assignees of the risks; and
d. The application date, type, and number of the permit or approval for which the
covenant is required; and
e. A statement waiving the right of the owner(s), the owner's heirs, successors and
assigns to assert any claim against the city by reason of or arising out of issuance
of this permit or approval by the city for the development on the property, except
only for such losses that may directly result from the negligence of the city.
2. The covenant shall be filed by the director with the Skagit County auditor's office, at
the expense of the owner, so as to become part of the Skagit County real property
records.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.05.270 Date of initial enforcement.
The public works director shall not enforce provisions of this code which require existing
discharges and land uses to adopt operational and nonstructural best management practices until
six months after adoption of rules identifying the best management practices to be required.
The director shall not enforce the provisions of this code which require existing discharges and
land uses to install structural best management practices until one year after adoption of rules
identifying the best management practices to be required.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)
§ 14.10.010 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.10.050