14.15.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Critical Area Regulations."
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.020 Application.
A. This chapter shall apply to land use, development, and platting located in the city limits of
Burlington, within the geographical areas that meet the definitions and criteria for critical
areas regulation as set forth in this chapter.
B. The following shall constitute critical areas:
1. Wetlands and riparian corridors, including Gages Slough. Wetlands serve many
important ecological and environmental functions and help to protect public health,
safety and welfare by providing flood storage and conveyance, erosion control, fish
and shellfish production, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, water quality protection,
water storage, education, scientific research and other public benefits. It is the purpose
of this chapter to protect these functions to prevent the continual loss of wetlands, and
where practical to enhance or restore wetland functions and values;
2. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. In addition to their intrinsic value, certain
species of fish and wildlife represent important historic, cultural, recreational and
economic resources. Many species serve as indicators of the condition of the
environment and the quality of life that local residents have invested in, enjoy and
respect. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect, restore where practical, and
enhance fish and wildlife populations and their associated habitats;
3. Frequently flooded areas. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare, minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions, and protect the ecological and hydrological functions of the floodplain;
4. Geologically hazardous areas. Geologically hazardous areas include areas susceptible
to the effects of erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geologic events. They pose a
threat to the health and safety of citizens when incompatible residential, commercial,
industrial, or infrastructure development is sited in areas of a hazard. Geologic
hazards pose a risk to life, property, and resources when steep slopes are destabilized
by inappropriate activities and development or when structures or facilities are sited
in areas susceptible to natural or human-caused geologic events. Some geologic
hazards can be reduced or mitigated by engineering, design, or modified construction
practices so that risks to health and safety are acceptable. When technology cannot
reduce risks to acceptable levels, building and other construction within identified
geologically hazardous areas shall be prohibited;
5. Special management areas, including:
a. Burlington Hill;
b. Gages Slough Corridor;
c. Skagit River Corridor.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1903 § 2 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.030 Purpose.
A. This chapter is adopted to assist in orderly development, conserve the value of property,
safeguard the public welfare, and provide protection for defined critical areas.
B. It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent contamination and depletion, avoid exorbitant
cleanup costs, hardships and potential physical harm to people.
C. The ordinance codified in this chapter was developed under the directives of the Growth
Management Act to conserve and protect critical areas pursuant to RCW 36.70A.172.
"Critical areas" are defined as wetlands, aquifer recharge areas, flood hazard areas,
geologically hazardous areas, and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. Some of
these areas, such as geologic hazards and flood hazard areas, are critical because of the
hazard they represent to public health. Others, such as fish and wildlife habitats and
wetlands, are critical because of their public value.
D. Maps are useful primarily as an indicator of the distribution and extent of critical areas.
Maps will be used wherever possible as part of the screening process for evaluating
individual permit applications. Although a number of map resources are utilized in this
chapter, regulatory measures such as buffer requirements are based upon the identification
of critical areas during the permit, development authorization, or other approval processes.
E. Critical areas will be designated by definition and then classified through site assessments
so that they can be identified using scientifically based criteria and protected. The use of
site assessments to confirm the actual presence and classification of critical areas is central
to the management approach developed under this chapter.
F. The ordinance codified in this chapter was drafted to provide regulatory structure for
identification, designation and protection of critical areas. This chapter allows staff to
provide site visits, preliminary reviews, and preapplication meetings to assist in the
identification of critical areas.
G. These regulations are intended to:
1. Protect human life, property, and the public health and safety of the citizens of
Burlington;
2. Minimize the expenditure of public money;
3. Maintain the city's flood insurance eligibility while avoiding regulations which are
unnecessarily restrictive or difficult to administer;
4. Ensure that wetland and other critical area functions and values are protected to
provide public benefits;
5. Implement the Burlington comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)
§ 14.15.040 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.050

14.15.040 Authority.
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted under the authority of chapters 36.70 and
36.70A RCW, and Article II of the Washington State Constitution.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.050 Jurisdiction and coordination.
A. Relationship to Other Federal, State and County Jurisdictional Agencies' Regulations.
Many state, federal and regional regulations apply to projects conducted within critical
areas. Uses otherwise allowed by local codes do not eliminate other agency regulatory
requirements.
1. Federal regulations include:
a. Clean Water Act, Section 401, 404;
b. Coastal Zone Management Act;
c. Endangered Species Act;
d. Federal Water Pollution Control Act;
e. Food Security Act – Swampbuster;
f. National Environmental Policy Act;
g. National Floodplain Insurance Program;
h. River and Harbor Act, Section 10.
2. State regulations include:
a. Chapter 43.21C RCW, State Environmental Policy Act;
b. Chapter 75.20 RCW, Construction Projects in State Waters;
c. Chapter 76.09 RCW, Forest Practices Regulations;
d. Chapter 77.12 RCW, Powers and Duties;
e. Chapter 78.44 RCW, Surface Mining Act;
f. Chapter 86.16 RCW, Floodplain Management (Formerly flood control zones by
state);
g. Chapter 90.03 RCW, Water Code;
h. Chapter 90.48 RCW, Water Pollution Control Act;
i. Chapter 90.58 RCW, Shoreline Management Act of 1971.
3. Local regulations include:
a. Chapter 14.10 BMC, Environmental Policy;
b. Chapter 14.05 BMC, Surface Water Management;
c. Skagit County shoreline management program.
B. Jurisdictional Substitution. In cases where other agencies possess jurisdictional control
over critical areas and it is determined by the director that the permit conditions satisfy the
requirements of this chapter, those requirements may substitute for the requirements of this
chapter. Such requirements shall be a condition of critical area approval and be enforceable
under this chapter. Such agencies may include, but are not limited to, the United States
Army Corps of Engineers, Environmental Protection Agency, and Fish and Wildlife
Service, the Swinomish Tribe, and the Washington State Department of Ecology,
Department of Natural Resources and Department of Fish and Wildlife. The applicant shall
be notified in writing when any such substitution is made.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.060 Resource information and maps.
A. Critical areas defined and identified in this chapter shall be mapped whenever possible.
These maps shall be advisory and used by the director to provide guidance in determining
applicability of the standards to a property. All sites which contain or include critical areas,
whether mapped or not, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Critical area maps, with the exception of the flood insurance rate map used to designate
certain flood hazard areas, are provided only as a general guide to alert the user to the
possible distribution, location and extent of critical areas. Map identification of critical
areas provides only approximate boundaries and locations. The actual locations and
boundaries of critical areas, as well as their quality and quantity, shall be based upon the
presence of the features applicable to each critical area element in this chapter. Maps shall
not be considered a regulatory standard or substitute for site-specific assessments. The
application of definitions, methodologies and performance standards pursuant to the site-
specific assessment requirements provided in this chapter is the controlling factor in
determining the actual presence and extent of critical areas.
C. Critical area maps maintained by the department shall utilize the best information currently
available and should be updated on a continual basis.
D. Critical areas mapped under the site assessment requirements of this chapter should be
compiled in a database and incorporated into critical area maps. This map information shall
be utilized to facilitate tracking of compliance with the requirements of this chapter to
ensure long-term protection of critical areas.
E. The city will make interpretations where needed as to exact location of the boundaries of
the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions). If there is a disagreement about the location
of the boundary, additional information from a licensed surveyor may be needed, and the
application shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. Such
appeals shall be granted consistent with the standards of Section 60.6 of the rules and
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59-76).
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.070 General requirements and authorizations required.
A. In addition to any other requirements identified in this chapter, or otherwise imposed by
§ 14.15.070 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.070
the Burlington Municipal Code, all development occurring in critical areas, or critical area
buffers, shall meet the following general requirements:
1. Site. Complete stabilization of all portions of a site which are disturbed or impacted
by the proposed development, including all development coverage and construction
activity areas, shall be required. Complete stabilization of all portions of a site refers
to the process and actions necessary to ensure that existing and proposed site
improvements are stabilized, and that all on-site areas and adjacent properties which
are disturbed or impacted are stabilized. The proposed development shall be limited
and controlled to avoid adverse impacts and potential harm and ensure safe, stable
and compatible development appropriate to site conditions. Other reasonable and
appropriate solutions to solve site stability problems may be required by the director.
2. Adjacent Site, Surrounding Area, and Drainage Basin. The proposed development
shall ensure safe, stable and compatible development which avoids adverse
environmental impacts and potential harm to adjacent sites, the surrounding
neighborhood, and the drainage basin. Detailed analysis of impacts of the
development upon wetlands, riparian corridors, native vegetation and wildlife
habitats, water quality, natural water temperature, slope and soil conditions, and
surface water drainage may be required at the request of the director when site and
area conditions indicate the need for this analysis. Supplemental technical reports may
be required by the director to specify measures to preserve, protect, and maintain
adjacent sites and the drainage basin and ensure safe, stable and compatible
development.
B. With the exception of activities identified as exempt under BMC § 14.15.120, any land use
activity that can impair the functions and values of critical areas or their buffers through a
development activity or by disturbance of the soil or water, and/or by removal of, or
damage to, existing vegetation shall require critical areas review and written authorization
pursuant to this chapter. Vegetation destruction or removal, other than the normal
maintenance of existing landscaping identified as exempt under BMC § 14.15.120, shall be
prohibited within a critical area or its required buffer, unless there is an approved buffer
management plan pursuant to the requirements of the particular critical area that
demonstrates there will be no adverse impact to the critical area with the proposed
vegetation removal and disturbance of the soil or water and includes any mitigation or
buffer enhancement necessary to address critical areas impacts. Authorizations required
under this chapter overlay other permit and approval requirements of the Burlington
Municipal Code. Regardless of whether a development permit or approval is required, any
proposed alteration that can adversely affect a critical area or its standard buffers' functions
must comply with the substantive and procedural requirements of this chapter. Critical
areas review pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted as part of the underlying permit or
approval, where applicable. It is the responsibility of the landowner, or designee, who
conducts or proposes to undertake land use activities that can adversely impact critical
areas or their buffers to obtain authorization prior to commencing such activities. In some
cases, the typical thresholds that trigger review and permits have been reduced to zero for
any development activity located within a critical area or its required buffer.
C. Procedures. No land use development permit, land division, development approval, or
other authorization required shall be granted until the applicant has demonstrated
compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter
1. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposal submitted conforms to the purposes
and standards of this chapter, assesses impacts an the critical area from activities and
uses proposed, and identifies protective mechanisms adequate to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
2. Each proposal shall be reviewed by the director for consistency with the applicable
regulations identified in this chapter and to ensure the protective mechanisms
proposed are sufficient to protect the critical area, public health, safety and welfare.
Conditions of approval shall be specified as necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. If there are no conditions under which the proposal could
be approved, then the proposal shall be denied.
D. All land use actions and development activities shall be conditioned as necessary to
mitigate impacts to critical areas as required by this chapter and any project that cannot
adequately mitigate its impacts to critical areas shall be denied. In all cases mitigation
sequencing shall be applied and no net loss of critical areas functions and values shall be
permitted.
E. Conflicts with Other Provisions. If any provision of this chapter conflicts with any other
applicable code provision, the more restrictive shall apply unless specifically accepted in
this chapter.
F. Satisfaction of the requirements of this chapter shall also be sufficient to satisfy the
requirement for critical areas analysis and mitigation pursuant to chapter 43.21C RCW,
State Environmental Policy Act, and chapter 14.10 BMC, Environmental Policy.
G. SEPA Compliance. The goals, policies and purposes set forth in this chapter shall be
considered policies of the State Environmental Policy Act. When applicable the applicant
must meet SEPA requirements.
H. Other Permits Required. It is recognized that many local, state, and/or federal permit
conditions may apply to the proposed action, and that compliance with the provisions of
this chapter may not necessarily constitute compliance with other such requirements.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.080 Public notice and records.
Public notice for projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be provided pursuant to
the requirements of BMC Title 14A, land use permit process.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.090 Application submittal requirements.
In addition to the application submittal requirements specified in other codes, a complete
application for development subject to this chapter shall include the following additional
information:
A. Surveyed Site Plan. A surveyed site plan shall be prepared by a state of Washington
licensed surveyor and shall include the following, when required by the community
development director:
1. Existing topography at two-foot contour intervals on site, within 25 feet of the site's
§ 14.15.090 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.100
abutting boundaries, and within the full width of abutting public and private rights-
of-way and easements;
2. Terrain and drainage flow characteristics within the site, within 25 feet of the site's
abutting boundaries, and within the full width of abutting public and private rights-
of-way and easements;
3. Proposed location and boundaries of all required undisturbed fenced areas and buffers
on site and on adjacent lands;
4. Location of all vegetation, including location and description of all trees over six
inches in diameter measured five feet above the base of the trunk, shrubs over eight
feet tall or six feet wide, and noting their species;
5. Location and boundaries of all existing and proposed site improvements on the site
and within 25 feet of the site's property boundaries, and the full width of abutting
public and private rights-of-way and easements. This shall include the limits of
development coverage, impervious surfaces and construction activity areas (noting
total square footage and percentage of site occupied);
6. Location of all grading activities in progress or proposed, and all drainage control
facilities or systems in existence, in progress or proposed within 25 feet of the site's
property boundaries, and the full width of abutting public and private rights-of-way
and easements;
7. Location of all existing and proposed utilities (water, sewer, gas, electric, phone,
cable, etc.), both above and below ground, on site, on adjacent lands within 25 feet of
the site's property lines, and in the full width of abutting public rights-of-way, and
proposed methods and locations for the proposed development to hook up to these
services;
8. Such other additional site plan information as necessary to complete review of a
project or waive specific submittal requirements when not necessary for project
review.
B. Technical Reports. Technical reports shall be prepared and submitted as required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.100 Administration.
A. The director shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter, including:
1. Review applications for land use actions to verify compliance with this chapter, issue
permit decisions, or make recommendations to the hearing examiner in accordance
with the permit processing procedures identified in BMC Title 14A;
2. Review applications for land use actions to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local government agencies from which prior
approval is required;
3. Recording and maintaining records of:
a. As-built elevation above mean sea level of the lowest floor including basement
of all new and substantially improved structures requiring a floodplain approval
and whether same structure contains a basement,
b. Certification by registered professional engineer or architect as required by this
chapter,
c. Floodplain approvals and other actions pursuant to the administration of this
chapter;
4. Notification to adjacent communities and the Department of Ecology prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse with copy to FEMA, and maintenance within
the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished;
5. When base flood elevation data has not been provided, obtaining, reviewing, and
reasonably utilizing any base flood elevation and floodway data that should become
available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer standards and
floodways;
6. Issuance of development permits pursuant to BMC Title 14A, Land Use Decisions,
and chapter 15.04 BMC, Uniform Codes, before construction or development begins
within the city limits.
B. This chapter shall be administered in accordance with chapter 86.16 RCW and chapter
508-60 WAC. This chapter shall be revised as necessary to conform with any changes in
state rules pertaining to flood control zones which may be adopted by the State Department
of Ecology subsequent to the effective date of delegation of the state's permit program to
the city.
C. The administrative procedure for critical areas review shall be as follows:
1. Preliminary Screening. Unless explicitly exempted from review under this chapter,
all development proposals shall be screened for the presence of critical areas
indicators, critical areas, and critical area buffers at the time of application. The city
may employ the following preliminary screening methods:
a. Review a critical areas checklist prepared by the applicant;
b. Review maps, critical area reports, permit records, or previous critical area
studies;
c. Inspect the site;
d. Review aerial photography, imagery, or remote sensing data;
e. Review studies, inventories, mapping, and data compiled by state, federal and
local government agencies;
f. Other methods consistent with best available science.
2. Repealed by Ord. 1933.
3. Repealed by Ord. 1933.
§ 14.15.100 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.120
4. Repealed by Ord. 1933.
5. Determination That Critical Areas May Be Present. If the city determines that critical
area indicators, critical areas, or critical area buffers are present within 300 feet of the
proposed activity or within a distance otherwise specified in this chapter, then the
determination shall be recorded in the project file and the applicant shall provide a
critical areas site assessment as specified in this chapter. Development of a site
assessment may precede a site visit; provided, that no disturbance of vegetation or
land surface occurs prior to authorization.
6. Critical Areas Determination and Conditions of Approval. Based on the critical areas
site assessment report and other available critical areas information, the city shall
make a determination on the proposed activity. A determination to approve a
proposed activity shall include designation of protected critical areas (PCAs) pursuant
to this chapter and stipulation of binding conditions and required mitigation,
monitoring, maintenance or other conditions of approval pursuant to this chapter. If
there are no conditions under which the proposed activity could be approved, then the
community development director shall deny the proposal.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.110 Critical areas checklist, site assessment and conditions of approval.
A. Site Assessment Required. Every application for an activity that might alter or adversely
affect a critical area or critical area buffer shall include a critical area site assessment.
Critical areas site assessments, as described in more detail in the various sections for each
type of critical area, shall be submitted as part of a complete application for a development
permit, or other approval of land use activities having the potential to impact critical areas
or their buffers, by a qualified expert.
B. Site Assessment Preparation. The critical area site assessment shall be prepared by a
qualified expert for the type of critical area or areas involved and shall contain the
information specified for each type of critical area. In general, the site assessment shall
include critical area inventory, assessment of impacts and, where applicable, proposed
mitigation, land use restrictions and landowner management, maintenance and monitoring
responsibilities. The city may require peer review or review by personnel from state and
federal agencies with expertise. The cost of any required peer review shall be borne by the
applicant in accordance with the city's adopted fee schedule.
C. Any site plans required by this chapter may be combined into a single site plan wherever
possible.
D. Critical Areas Determination and Conditions of Approval. After receiving a complete site
assessment report, the city shall determine whether or not the proposed activity meets the
requirements of this chapter and under what conditions. This determination shall utilize the
information provided in the site assessment report and all other resource information
available.
E. Critical area determinations shall be made in writing, contain findings addressing the
requirements of this chapter, and shall identify any conditions of approval, land use
prohibitions, and mitigation, management, monitoring and maintenance requirements.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.120 Application of standards.
This chapter shall apply to all public and private land use actions and development including,
but not limited to, new structures, additions, land divisions, grading, and filling located on either
public or private property. The development activities listed below may be exempted from the
detailed critical area review requirements of this chapter; provided, that any development in a
floodplain management area constituting a substantial improvement or substantial repair shall be
subject to review. Exemption from review and permitting shall not be construed to constitute an
exemption from the substantive requirements of this chapter. No land use action or development
activity shall result in a net loss of critical area functions and values.
A. Emergencies that threaten the public health, safety and welfare. An emergency is an
unanticipated and imminent threat to the public health or safety or to the environment
which requires immediate action within a period of time too short to allow full compliance
with this chapter. Emergency actions that create an impact to a critical area or its buffer
shall use reasonable methods that can address the emergency but also that have the least
possible impact to the critical area or its buffer. The responsible party (property owner or
agent) shall restore the critical area and buffer after the emergency to the extent feasible.
The person or agency undertaking such action shall notify the director within one working
day or as soon as practical following commencement of the emergency activity. Following
such notification, the director shall determine if the action taken was within the scope of
the emergency actions allowed in this subsection. If the director determines that the action
taken or any part of the action taken was beyond the scope of allowed emergency actions,
then the enforcement provision shall apply.
B. Normal and routine maintenance or repair of existing structures, utilities, sewage disposal
systems, potable water systems, drainage facilities, ponds, or public and private roads and
driveways associated with preexisting residential or commercial development, provided
any maintenance or repair activities shall use reasonable methods with the least amount of
potential impact to the critical areas and any impact to a critical area or its buffer shall be
restored after the maintenance to the extent feasible.
C. Normal maintenance, repair, or operation of existing structures, facilities, and improved
areas accessory to a single-family residential use, provided any maintenance or repair
activities shall use reasonable methods with the least amount of potential impact to the
critical area and any impact to a critical area or its buffer shall be restored after the
maintenance to the extent feasible.
D. Modification of an existing single-family residence that does not change the use from
residential, does not expand the building footprint or increase septic effluent, and does not
adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.
E. Modification of other than a single-family use which does not expand the building
footprint, alter the use or increase septic effluent, pursuant to the requirements of the
nonconforming use and structure provisions, and does not adversely impact critical areas
or their buffers.
F. Outdoor recreational activities which do not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.
G. The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to natural reproduction of
such crops and provided the harvesting does not require tilling soil, planting crops, or
changing existing topography, water conditions or water sources; and provided further, that
§ 14.15.120 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.130
the activity does not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.
H. The operation and maintenance, construction and reconstruction of diking and drainage
systems which protect life and property along the Skagit River.
I. Education and scientific research activities which do not adversely impact critical areas or
their buffers.
J. Construction or modification of navigational aids and channels markers.
K. Site investigation work necessary for land use applications such as surveys, soil logs,
percolation tests and other related activities which do not adversely impact critical areas or
their buffers. In every case, critical area impacts shall be minimized and disturbed areas
shall be immediately restored.
L. Maintenance activities such as mowing and normal pruning; provided, that such
maintenance activities are limited to existing landscaping improvements and do not expand
into critical areas or associated buffers, do not expose soils, do not alter topography, do not
destroy or clear native vegetation, and do not diminish water quality or quantity.
M. Fish, wildlife, wetland and/or riparian enhancement activities not required as mitigation;
provided, that the project is approved by the U. S. Department of Fish and Wildlife, the
Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife or the Washington State Department of
Ecology.
N. For developments in floodplain management areas:
1. Normal maintenance, resurfacing and rebuilding, at comparable grade of streets,
roads, paths, and sidewalks;
2. Maintenance and minor repair of existing improvements, provided such activities do
not constitute "substantial repair" or "substantial improvement" as defined by this
chapter.
O. All such activities shall be carried out in ways that cause the least impact to critical areas
and their buffers. If any damage is caused to a critical area or buffer in connection with
such activity, the critical area and its buffer must be restored to the extent feasible. To be
exempt does not give permission to destroy a critical area or ignore risk. An exemption
from permit requirements is not an exemption from complying with the other requirements
of this chapter. Proponents of such activities shall be responsible for notifying the
community development director if any damage occurs and shall provide all necessary
restoration or mitigation. For information on identifying, protecting or mitigating adverse
impacts to critical areas, refer to sections in this chapter on wetlands, aquifer recharge
areas, geologically hazardous areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, and flood
hazard areas.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1903 § 2 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.130 General construction and maintenance standards.
All land use actions and development activities located in critical areas or critical area buffers
shall be subject to the following general construction and maintenance standards:
A. All buffer areas and other designated protected areas shall be fenced with a highly visible
and durable protective barrier during construction to prevent access and protect critical
areas.
B. All disturbed areas on the site, including development coverage and construction activity
areas, shall be controlled in a manner sufficient to control drainage and prevent erosion
during construction, and revegetated to promote drainage control and prevent erosion after
construction. In cases where erosion potential is severe, a vegetation and revegetation
report prepared by a qualified professional with landscaping, plant ecology and botany
education and experience may be required. All revegetation shall consist of native,
noninvasive trees, shrubs, and ground cover that is suitable for the location and does not
require permanent irrigation systems for long-term survival.
C. When development is proposed in a critical area or critical area buffer, grading activities
shall be strictly limited to areas located on the most environmentally suitable portion of the
site.
D. All drainage associated with the development shall be managed using an approved drainage
control system in accordance with the provisions of this title.
E. Land use actions and development shall comply with the seismic design requirements
identified in the building code adopted by, or referenced in, BMC Title 15.
F. All grading in critical areas shall not occur prior to March 31st and shall be stabilized by
October 31st unless demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director based on approved
technical analysis that no environmental harm or safety issues would result from grading
between November 1st and March 31st.
G. Construction activities shall adhere to a prepared schedule approved by the city prior to
issuance of a building or development permit.
This schedule shall include, but not be limited to, a schedule for compliance with project
conditions, limits of construction and work activities, equipment to be used, start and
duration of each phase, and work sequencing.
H. Dumping or filling is prohibited in wetlands and special flood risk areas. Dumping is
prohibited in all critical areas. Dumping includes deposit of yard waste, trash, litter, refuse,
dirt, concrete, asphalt, rocks or similar materials, but shall not include work authorized by
approved plans and permits.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.140 Reasonable use exception.
If the application of this chapter would result in denial of reasonable and economically viable use
of a property, then a landowner may seek a reasonable use exception from the standards of this
chapter, except for the flood hazard critical area where no exceptions are allowed. Reasonable
use exceptions shall only apply to legal lots of record established prior to the effective date of this
chapter. Reasonable use exceptions are intended as a "last resort" when no plan for mitigation
can meet the requirements of this chapter and allow the applicant a reasonable economically
viable use of their property. Reasonable use exceptions may only be granted under the following
conditions:
A. The application of this chapter would deny all reasonable and economically viable use of
§ 14.15.140 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.150
the property and there is no reasonable and economically viable use with a lesser impact on
the critical area than the use proposed; and
B. The proposed development does not pose a threat to the public health and safety; and any
proposed modification to a critical area will be evaluated through consideration of a site
assessment and mitigation plan prepared by the applicant's qualified consultant pursuant to
the requirements of this chapter, and will be the minimum necessary to allow reasonable
and economically viable use of the property; and
C. Reasonable use determinations may be issued with conditions of approval, including
modifications to the size and placement of structures and facilities to minimize impacts to
critical areas and associated buffers. Mitigation requirements may also be imposed to
ensure that all impacts are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.150 Critical area and buffer mitigation requirements – General provisions.
A. Buffers.
1. As described in more detail in each relevant section, buffers have in some cases been
determined necessary and appropriate to protect critical areas and their functions or
to prevent risk from a critical area hazard. In those sections of this chapter where
specific buffers are identified, those buffers are deemed "required" or "standard"
buffers. If a project or activity does not propose any alteration of those buffers or of
the associated critical area and the city determines that these buffers are adequate to
protect the critical area or to prevent risk of a hazard from the critical area, then
subject to the provisions of this section, no additional mitigation will be required.
Once the critical area and its buffer have properly been delineated through a critical
areas assessment and any conditions of approval have been established to ensure
protection of the critical area function, no further critical areas mitigation assessment
is required, except as necessary to ensure that long-term protection of critical areas
and buffers is met in practice through compliance with the provisions of this section.
The applicant shall ensure the protection of critical area by performing a site
assessment on the entire parcel.
2. If, however, based on a site assessment by a qualified expert, unique features of the
particular critical area or its buffer or of the proposed development, the qualified
expert determines that additional buffers and/or mitigation measures beyond these
buffers are necessary to adequately protect the function of the critical area or to
prevent risk of a hazard from the critical area, such additional mitigation requirements
may be imposed, provided the qualified expert can demonstrate, based on best
available science, why that additional mitigation or buffering is required to adequately
protect the critical area function or to prevent hazard from a critical area.
3. If the applicant proposes to reduce buffers or to alter the critical area or its required
buffer, then the applicant shall demonstrate, based on best available science, why such
buffer and/or critical area modification, together with such alternative mitigation
proposed in the critical areas assessment, is sufficient to provide equal or better
protection of the critical area function or provide no increased risk of a hazard from
the critical area.
4. The critical areas assessment and the conditions of approval shall make adequate
provision for long-term protection related to critical areas and buffers, and shall fully
address the requirements of this chapter.
However, critical areas and/or buffers identified as protected critical areas (PCAs) as
defined in this chapter do not require any provisions for public access, and appropriate
restrictions may be included in the easement or title documents. Critical areas and/or
buffers identified as PCAs are, however, subject to periodic inspection by the director,
upon prior notification to the landowner, to ensure long-term protection.
5. Protected Critical Areas (PCAs).
a. For proposed land divisions, critical areas and their associated buffers identified
through the site assessment and city review process shall be designated as PCAs
and placed in separate tracts or easements and protected through protective
covenants shown on the face of the recorded plat. (See BMC § 14.15.160,
Protected critical area (PCA) requirements.)
b. For development projects or land use activities not involving a new land
division, the critical area and its associated buffer identified through the site
assessment process shall instead be identified as a PCA by either easement, open
space designation or permit conditions, all including restrictive covenants and
recorded with the auditor on a site plan to ensure long-term protection. Critical
areas and/or buffers identified as PCAs are subject to periodic inspection, upon
prior notification to the landowner, to ensure long-term protection.
6. Open Space – Protected Area. If a portion of a parcel contains a proposed
development project that triggers a development permit, and has not had its critical
areas and associated buffers delineated because it was outside the project or area
affected by the project, then further critical areas assessment may be required in the
future prior to any change of use, or new development permit for that portion of the
site.
B. Mitigation. All proposed alterations to critical areas or associated buffers shall require
mitigation sufficient to provide for and maintain the functional values of the critical area or
to prevent risk from a critical area hazard and shall give adequate consideration to the
reasonable economically viable use of the property. Mitigation of one critical area impact
should not result in unmitigated impacts to another critical area. Mitigation may include,
but is not limited to: buffers, setbacks, limits on clearing and grading, best management
practices for erosion control and maintenance of water quality, or other conditions
appropriate to avoid or mitigate identified adverse impacts.
C. Preferred Mitigation Sequence. Mitigation includes avoiding, minimizing or compensating
for adverse impacts to regulated critical areas or their buffers. The preferred sequence of
mitigation is defined below:
1. Avoid the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
2. Minimize the impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its
implementation by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to
avoid or reduce impacts;
§ 14.15.150 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.160
3. Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected environment
to the conditions existing at the time of the initiation of the project or activity;
4. Reduce or eliminate the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations
during the life of the action;
5. Compensate for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources
or environments;
6. All proposed mitigation shall be included in the critical areas assessment. The critical
areas mitigation shall include the following:
a. Description of proposed mitigations (critical areas lost/critical areas gained);
b. Analysis of avoidance, minimization, reduction, and compensation;
c. Functional analysis of mitigation/analysis of prevention of risk hazard;
d. Proposed applicant or landowner monitoring or inspection measures and
schedule, including specification of method and frequency of submittal of
reports on results; and
e. Contingency plan.
D. Mitigation requirements shall be identified in written conditions of approval and shall be
included in an approved mitigation plan.
E. Financial Assurance. The approved mitigation plan shall be completed prior to final
approval of the development permit. For all projects with an estimated mitigation cost of
$4,000 or over, the financial assurance may be required to assure compliance with the
mitigation plan if the complete mitigation proposed in the site assessment cannot be
completed prior to final approval of the development permit. Financial assurance shall be
in the form of either a surety bond, performance bond, assignment of savings account or an
irrevocable letter of credit guaranteed by an acceptable financial institution with terms and
conditions acceptable to the city attorney, shall be in the amount of 125 percent of the
estimated cost of the uncompleted actions or construction, and shall be assigned in favor of
the city of Burlington. The term of the financial assurance shall remain in place until the
required mitigation is complete.
F. Monitoring of Critical Areas Mitigation. On a regular basis, but no less frequently than
once every two years, the city shall survey a sampling of projects and activities for which
critical area site assessments were required, including mitigation plans, potentially
impacting fish-bearing streams and/or Category I, II or III wetlands. The sample shall be
taken from permits or approvals issued more than 10 months prior to the sampling date.
The selected sites shall be inspected for critical area and buffer size and condition and for
compliance with any required mitigation or other conditions of approval. Results of such
sampling shall be included in the permanent record for the project or activity, shall be
reported to the city council, and shall also be utilized for enforcement purposes.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.160 Protected critical area (PCA) requirements.
A. PCA Identification and Recording.
1. PCA Identification. Approval of development projects which trigger a development
permit and other land use activities that can cause adverse impacts to critical areas
and/or their buffers shall require the identification and designation of PCAs by the
community development director. This section is intended to apply to unique critical
area elements such as buffers or wellhead protection areas that can cause adverse
impacts; location in the floodplain unless adjacent to a wetland or riparian corridor
does not require recording of a PCA. PCAs shall include all critical areas and
associated buffers on the proposed project site which have been identified through the
site assessment process.
2. PCA Recording. All PCAs shall be recorded with the county auditor in accordance
with the procedures established under this section. The applicant shall be responsible
for all fees and other costs associated with recording of PCAs.
3. For each project or activity that requires recording of PCAs, the following
information shall be recorded with the auditor and be readily available to the public
upon request:
a. Recorded documents signed by the landowner and the director which stipulates
any special conditions of approval, protective covenants, binding conditions, or
other requirements such as use restrictions, required mitigation, and/or
landowner maintenance or monitoring requirements established at the time of
approval;
b. Required final plat map or site plan clearly showing the locations of PCAs,
existing vegetation and permanent buffer edge markers;
c. Additional information necessary to document the critical areas inventory at the
time of approval, including descriptions of identified critical areas, their
locations, functions and values, and existing critical areas or buffer vegetation;
d. Identification of any local responsibilities beyond those required by this chapter;
e. Reference to the file containing the complete record of information pertaining to
approval of the project or activity.
4. Permanent Buffer Edge Markers. Permanent edge markers and fencing along the
outer edges of PCAs, with the exception of aquifer recharge areas, may be required.
The director shall have the authority to specify the size, spacing, and other required
characteristics of any critical area markers or fencing and may require that critical
areas, buffers, and PCAs be surveyed.
B. Protected Critical Area (PCA) Designations for New Land Divisions.
1. For land divisions where site assessments have occurred pursuant to this chapter, all
PCAs shall be placed into separate tracts or easements, whose uses shall be regulated
by the provisions of this chapter and any conditions of approval, including protective
covenants and binding agreements as provided for under subsection (A) of this
section. Area within a PCA can be included in total acreage for development purposes
end may be used in lot area or density calculations. PCAs may be owned and
maintained by the owner of the lot of which they are a part or transferred to the
homeowners association or land trust. Wetlands and buffers in the Gages Slough
§ 14.15.160 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.160
corridor may be donated to the city in exchange for park impact fee credit.
2. Recording. PCA designations shall be recorded with the auditor as part of the plat
approval process.
The auditor file number referencing the agreement shall be on the face of the plat and
its provisions shall run with the land.
3. PCA Descriptions. The location of PCAs shall be clearly identified on site plans and
on preliminary and final plat maps. PCAs shall be labeled using the letters A through
Z, or another labeling system approved by the community development director.
Where more than one lot is involved, each lot shall carry independent labeling as
described in subsection (D)(1) of this section.
4. Ingress, Egress and Use. Owners of PCAs shall grant ingress and egress by the
community development director or his or her agent for monitoring and evaluation of
compliance with established conditions of approval, binding conditions or any
required mitigation. As part of an approved land division, the use limitations required
of a designated and regulated critical area according to the provisions of this chapter,
including the conclusions of the critical areas site assessment report and any
conditions of approval, protective covenants and other binding conditions, shall be
clearly stated on the face of the recorded plat.
C. PCAs on Preexisting Lots.
1. For development proposals and other land use activities that can adversely impact
critical areas on preexisting lots, not part of a proposed land division or other form of
multiple lot development, PCAs shall be identified on a scaled site plan showing the
location of the PCA, structures (existing and proposed) and their distances from the
PCA and lot lines to show relative location within the subject parcel(s). The project
or activity shall be conditioned for critical area protection and the resulting
information recorded with the auditor as defined under subsection (A) of this section.
The site plan may be prepared by the applicant and all distances and locations of
structures may be measured from the established PCA boundary to within plus or
minus five feet.
2. Ingress and Egress. The city shall be granted access to PCAs for monitoring and
evaluation of compliance with established conditions of approval, binding conditions
or any required mitigation.
D. PCA Mapping, Labeling, and Area Calculations.
1. All PCAs shall be mapped. The area shall be delineated on the final plat map or on a
site plan to an accuracy of plus or minus five feet horizontal and monumented in the
field by a qualified expert. The delineated boundaries of critical areas, critical area
buffers, and mitigation sites shall be surveyed. The director may waive this
requirement for simple small scale projects or where access considerations make a
complete survey infeasible.
2. During construction phases of development, clear temporary marking using flagging
and staking shall be maintained along the outer limits of the delineated PCA or the
limits of the proposed site disturbance outside of the PCA. Prior to the start of
construction activity, and as necessary during construction, temporary markings shall
be inspected and approved by the community development director or designee.
The person responsible for inspecting the temporary flagging shall provide written
confirmation to be included in the record as to whether or not the flagging has
been installed consistent with the permit requirements prior to commencement of the
permitted activity.
3. All PCAs shall include the necessary labeling to show calculated area (in square feet
or acreage), and type and/or class of critical area within each lot. This information
shall be noted on the face of the approved plat or site plan.
4. Sign, Marker and Fence Maintenance. It is the responsibility of the landowner to
maintain the required PCA markers, signs or fences in working order throughout the
duration of the development project or land use activity. Maintenance includes any
necessary replacement. Removal of required signs, markers or fences without prior
written approval of the director shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.170 Incentives.
The following incentives are intended to minimize the burden to individual property owners
from application of the provisions of this chapter and assist the city in achieving the goals of this
chapter:
A. Open Space. Any property owner on whose property a critical area or its associated buffer
is located and who proposes to put the critical area and buffer in a separate open space tract
may apply for current use property tax assessment on that separate tract pursuant to
chapter84.34 RCW.
B. Conservation Easement. Any person who owns an identified critical area or its associated
buffer may place a conservation easement over that portion of the property by naming a
qualified designee under RCW 64.04.130 as beneficiary of the conservation easement. This
conservation easement can be used in lieu of the creation of a separate critical areas tract to
qualify for open space tax assessment described in subsection (A) of this section.
The purpose of the easement shall be to preserve, protect, maintain, restore and limit
future use of the property affected. The terms of the conservation easement may include
prohibitions or restrictions on access and shall be approved by the property owner and the
qualified designee.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)
§ 14.15.180 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.185
Article II
Wetlands

14.15.180 Wetlands identification and rating.
A. Identification and Delineation. Identification of wetlands and delineation of their
boundaries pursuant to this chapter shall be done in accordance with the approved federal
wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements. All areas within the city
meeting the wetland designation criteria in that procedure are hereby designated critical
areas and are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Wetland delineations are valid for
five years; after such date the city shall determine whether a revision or additional
assessment is necessary.
B. Rating. Wetlands shall be rated according to the Washington Department of Ecology
wetland rating system, as set forth in the Washington State Wetland Rating System for
Western Washington: 2014 Update (Ecology Publication No. 14-06-029, effective January
2015) or as revised and approved by Ecology, which contains the definitions and methods
for determining whether the criteria below are met.
1. Category I. Category I wetlands are: (a) relatively undisturbed estuarine wetlands
larger than one acre; (b) wetlands of high conservation value that are identified by
scientists of the Washington Natural Heritage Program/DNR; (c) bogs; (d) mature and
old-growth forested wetlands larger than one acre; (e) wetlands in coastal lagoons; (f)
interdunal wetlands that score eight or nine habitat points and are larger than one acre;
and (g) wetlands that perform many functions well (scoring 23 points or more). These
wetlands: (a) represent unique or rare wetland types; (b) are more sensitive to
disturbance than most wetlands; (c) are relatively undisturbed and contain ecological
attributes that are impossible to replace within a human lifetime; or (d) provide a high
level of functions.
2. Category II. Category II wetlands are: (a) estuarine wetlands smaller than one acre, or
disturbed estuarine wetlands larger than one acre; (b) interdunal wetlands larger than
one acre or those found in a mosaic of wetlands; or (c) wetlands with a moderately
high level of functions (scoring between 20 and 22 points).
3. Category III. Category III wetlands are: (a) wetlands with a moderate level of
functions (scoring between 16 and 19 points); (b) can often be adequately replaced
with a well-planned mitigation project; and (c) interdunal wetlands between 0.1 and
one acre. Wetlands scoring between 16 and 19 points generally have been disturbed
in some ways and are often less diverse or more isolated from other natural resources
in the landscape than Category II wetlands.
4. Category IV. Category IV wetlands have the lowest levels of functions (scoring fewer
than 16 points) and are often heavily disturbed. These are wetlands that we should be
able to replace, or in some cases to improve. However, experience has shown that
replacement cannot be guaranteed in any specific case. These wetlands may provide
some important functions, and should be protected to some degree.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.185 Wetland buffers.
A. Standard Wetland Buffer Widths. The standard buffer widths in Table 14.15.185-1 have
been established in accordance with the best available science. They are based on the
category of wetland and the habitat score as determined by a qualified wetland professional
using the Washington State wetland rating system for western Washington.
1. Buffer Conditions.
a. These buffer widths assume that the buffer is vegetated with a native plant
community appropriate for the ecoregion. If the existing buffer is unvegetated,
sparsely vegetated, or vegetated with invasive species that do not perform
needed functions, the buffer should either be planted to create the appropriate
plant community or the buffer should be widened to ensure that adequate
functions of the buffer are provided.
b. Measurement of Wetland Buffers. All buffers shall be measured perpendicular
from the wetland boundary as surveyed in the field. The buffer for a wetland
created, restored, or enhanced as compensation for approved wetland alterations
shall be the same as the buffer required for the category of the created, restored,
or enhanced wetland. Only fully vegetated buffers will be considered. Lawns,
walkways, driveways, and other mowed or paved areas will not be considered
buffers or included in buffer area calculations.
c. Buffers on Mitigation Sites. All mitigation sites shall have buffers consistent
with the buffer requirements of this chapter to the extent feasible. Buffers shall
be based on the expected or target category of the proposed wetland mitigation
site.
d. Overlapping Critical Area Buffers. If buffers for two contiguous critical areas
overlap (such as buffers for a stream and a wetland), the wider buffer applies.
e. Buffer Maintenance. Except as otherwise specified or allowed in accordance
with this chapter, wetland buffers shall be retained in an undisturbed or
enhanced condition. In the case of compensatory mitigation sites, removal of
invasive nonnative weeds is required for the duration of the required
maintenance and monitoring timeline, which ranges from five to 10 years
depending on location.
Table 14.15.185-1. Width of buffers needed to protect wetlands in western
Washington considering impacts of proposed land uses.
Category of Wetland Required Buffer
IV 50 ft
III 150 ft
II 300 ft
I 300 ft
B. Increased Wetland Buffer Widths. Buffer widths shall be increased on a case-by-case basis
when a larger buffer is necessary to protect wetland functions and values. This
determination shall be supported by appropriate documentation showing that it is
reasonably related to protection of the functions and values of the wetland. The
§ 14.15.185 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.185
documentation must include but not be limited to the following criteria:
1. The wetland is used by a plant or animal species listed by the federal government or
the state as endangered, threatened, candidate, sensitive, monitored or documented
priority species or habitats, or essential or outstanding habitat for those species or has
unusual nesting or resting sites such as heron rookeries or raptor nesting trees; or
2. The adjacent land is susceptible to severe erosion, and erosion-control measures will
not effectively prevent adverse wetland impacts; or
3. The adjacent land has minimal vegetative cover or slopes greater than 30 percent.
C. Decreased Wetland Buffer Widths. Buffer widths shall be decreased on a case-by-case
basis as determined by the city. This determination shall be supported by appropriate
documentation showing that it still protects the functions and values of the wetland. The
documentation must include but not be limited to the following criteria:
1. Buffer averaging to improve wetland protection may be permitted when all of the
following conditions are met:
a. The wetland has significant differences in characteristics that affect its habitat
functions, such as a wetland with a forested component adjacent to a degraded
emergent component or a "dual-rated" wetland with a Category I area adjacent
to a lower-rated area.
b. The buffer is increased adjacent to the higher-functioning area of habitat or
more-sensitive portion of the wetland and decreased adjacent to the lower-
functioning or less-sensitive portion as demonstrated by a critical areas report
from a qualified wetland professional.
c. The total area of the buffer after averaging is equal to the area required without
averaging.
d. The buffer at its narrowest point is never less than either three-quarters of the
required width or 75 feet for Category I and II, 50 feet for Category III, and 25
feet for Category IV, whichever is greater.
2. Buffer averaging to allow reasonable use of a parcel may be permitted when all of the
following are met:
a. There are no feasible alternatives to the site design that could be accomplished
without buffer averaging.
b. The averaged buffer will not result in degradation of the wetland's functions and
values as demonstrated by a critical areas report from a qualified wetland
professional.
c. The total buffer area after averaging is equal to the area required without
averaging.
d. The buffer at its narrowest point is never less than either three-quarters of the
required width or 75 feet for Category I and II, 50 feet for Category III and 25
feet for Category IV, whichever category is applicable.
D. Allowed Buffer Uses. The following uses may be allowed within a wetland buffer in
accordance with the review procedures of this chapter; provided they are not prohibited by
any other applicable law and they are conducted in a manner so as to minimize impacts to
the buffer and adjacent wetland:
1. Conservation and Restoration Activities. Conservation or restoration activities aimed
at protecting the soil, water, vegetation, or wildlife.
2. Passive recreation. Passive recreation facilities designed and in accordance with an
approved critical area report, including:
a. Walkways and trails; provided, that those pathways are limited to minor
crossings having no adverse impact on water quality. They should be generally
parallel to the perimeter of the wetland, located only in the outer 25 percent of
the wetland buffer area, and located to avoid removal of significant trees. They
should be limited to pervious surfaces no more than five feet in width for
pedestrian use only. Raised boardwalks utilizing nontreated pilings may be
acceptable.
b. Wildlife-viewing structures.
3. Educational and scientific research activities.
4. Normal and routine maintenance and repair of any existing public or private facilities
within an existing right-of-way; provided, that the maintenance or repair does not
increase the footprint or use of the facility or right-of-way.
5. The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to natural reproduction
of such crops and provided the harvesting does not require tilling of soil, planting of
crops, chemical applications, or alteration of the wetland by changing existing
topography, water conditions, or water source.
6. Drilling for utilities/utility corridors under a buffer, with entrance/exit portals located
completely outside of the wetland buffer boundary; provided, that the drilling does
not interrupt the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of surface
water down through the soil column. Specific studies by a hydrologist are necessary
to determine whether the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of
surface water down through the soil column is disturbed.
7. Enhancement of a wetland buffer through the removal of nonnative invasive plant
species. Removal of invasive plant species shall be restricted to hand removal. All
removed plant material shall be taken away from the site and appropriately disposed
of. Plants that appear on the Washington State Noxious Weed Control Board list of
noxious weeds must be handled and disposed of according to a noxious weed control
plan appropriate to that species. Revegetation with appropriate native species at
natural densities is allowed in conjunction with removal of invasive plant species.
8. Storm water management facilities. Storm water management facilities are limited to
storm water dispersion outfalls and bioswales. They may be allowed within the outer
25 percent of the buffer of Category III or IV wetlands only; provided, that:
a. No other location is feasible; and
§ 14.15.185 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.185
b. The location of such facilities will not degrade the functions or values of the
wetland; and
c. Storm water management facilities are not allowed in buffers of Category I or II
wetlands; and
d. The hydroperiod of the wetland is not altered.
9. Nonconforming Uses. Repair and maintenance of nonconforming uses or structures,
where legally established within the buffer, provided they do not increase the degree
of nonconformity.
E. Signs and Fencing of Wetlands and Buffers.
1. Temporary Markers. The outer perimeter of the wetland buffer and the clearing limits
identified by an approved permit or authorization shall be marked in the field with
temporary "clearing limits" fencing in such a way as to ensure that no unauthorized
intrusion will occur. The marking is subject to inspection by the community
development director prior to the commencement of permitted activities. This
temporary marking shall be maintained throughout construction and shall not be
removed until permanent signs, if required, are in place.
2. Permanent Signs. As a condition of any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this
chapter, the city may require the installation of permanent signs along the boundary
of a wetland or buffer.
a. Permanent signs shall be made of an enamel-coated metal face and attached to a
metal post or another nontreated material of equal durability. Signs must be
posted at an interval of one per lot or every 50 feet, whichever is less, and must
be maintained by the property owner in perpetuity. The signs shall be worded as
follows or with alternative language approved by the community development
director:
Protected Wetland Area
No Dumping - Do Not Disturb
Thank you
b. The provisions of subsection (E)(2)(a) of this section may be modified as
necessary to assure protection of sensitive features or wildlife.
3. Fencing.
a. Permanent fencing shall be required around wetland buffers. The director may
waive this requirement for large sites or situations where the installation of
fencing is not feasible due to topography, a lack of access, or other site
constraints.
b. Fencing installed as part of a proposed activity or as required in this subsection
shall be designed so as to not interfere with species migration, including fish
runs, and shall be constructed in a manner that minimizes impacts to the wetland
and associated habitat. The director shall have the authority to specify
appropriate standards for buffer fencing consistent with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.190 Wetlands initial project review.
A. If the preliminary screening indicates the potential presence of wetland indicators,
wetlands, or wetland buffers a professional site assessment shall be conducted to identify
any wetland indicators within 300 feet of a proposed project or activity.
B. The following map references shall be used to assist in making a determination:
1. Wetlands mapped under the National Wetland Inventory by the U. S. Department of
Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service;
2. Areas mapped as hydric soils under the Soil Survey of Skagit County Area,
Washington, by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS);
3. A water of the state as defined under WAC 222-16-030 and maintained in the
Washington State Department of Natural Resources Stream Type Maps; and
4. Wetlands previously identified through the methodology specified under this title for
another project.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.200 Wetlands site assessment requirements.
If a wetlands site assessment is required, it shall meet the following requirements:
A. A wetland reconnaissance shall be performed by a qualified wetlands professional. The
reconnaissance shall identify the presence of wetlands within 300 feet of the project or
activity area. If this wetland reconnaissance demonstrates no wetlands within 300 feet of
the activity area, then no further study is required.
B. A wetland delineation shall be performed as part of a site assessment where a wetland
reconnaissance confirms the presence of a wetland or the applicant chooses to perform
delineation instead of a wetland reconnaissance. The delineation shall be performed by a
qualified wetland professional trained in conducting delineations in accordance with the
methodology specified under this title.
C. If the site of a proposed development includes, is likely to include, or is within 300 feet of
a wetland, a wetland report, prepared by a qualified professional, shall be required. The
expense of preparing the wetland report shall be borne by the applicant.
D. Minimum Standards for Wetland Reports. The written report and the accompanying plan
sheets shall contain the following information, at a minimum:
1. The written report shall include at a minimum:
a. The name and contact information of the applicant; the name, qualifications, and
contact information for the primary author(s) of the wetland critical area report;
a description of the proposal; identification of all the local, state, and/or federal
wetland-related permit(s) required for the project; and a vicinity map for the
§ 14.15.200 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.200
project.
b. A statement specifying the accuracy of the report and all assumptions made and
relied upon.
c. Documentation of any fieldwork, performed on the site, including field data
sheets for delineations, rating system forms, baseline hydrologic data, etc.
d. A description of the methodologies used to conduct the wetland delineations,
rating system forms, or impact analyses including references.
e. Identification and characterization of all critical areas, wetlands, water bodies,
shorelines, floodplains, and buffers on or adjacent to the proposed project area.
For areas off site of the project site, estimate conditions within 300 feet of the
project boundaries using the best available information.
f. For each wetland identified on site and within 300 feet of the project site
provide: the wetland rating, including a description of and score for each
function, per wetland ratings of this title; required buffers; hydrogeomorphic
classification; wetland acreage based on a professional survey from the field
delineation (acreages for on-site portion and entire wetland area including off-
site portions); Cowardin classification of vegetation communities; habitat
elements; soil conditions based on site assessment and/or soil survey
information; and to the extent possible, hydrologic information such as location
and condition of inlet/outlets (if they can be legally accessed), estimated water
depths within the wetland, and estimated hydroperiod patterns based on visual
cues (e.g., algal mats, drift lines, flood debris, etc.). Provide acreage estimates,
classifications, and ratings based on entire wetland complexes, not only the
portion present on the proposed project site.
g. A description of the proposed actions, including an estimation of acreages of
impacts to wetlands and buffers based on the field delineation and survey and
an analysis of site development alternatives, including a no-development
alternative.
h. An assessment of the probable cumulative impacts to the wetlands and buffers
resulting from the proposed development.
i. A description of reasonable efforts made to apply mitigation sequencing
pursuant to mitigation sequencing to avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to
critical areas.
j. A discussion of measures, including avoidance, minimization, and
compensation, proposed to preserve existing wetlands and restore any wetlands
that were degraded prior to the current proposed land use activity.
k. A conservation strategy for habitat and native vegetation that addresses methods
to protect and enhance on-site habitat and wetland functions.
l. An evaluation of the functions of the wetland and adjacent buffer. Include
reference for the method used and data sheets.
m. An evaluation of flood and stormwater storage capacity, water quality functions,
and an analysis of how the proposed development may impact these functions
and values.
2. A copy of the site plan sheet(s) for the project must be included with the written report
and must include, at a minimum:
a. Maps (to scale) depicting delineated and surveyed wetland and required buffers
on site, including buffers for off-site critical areas that extend onto the project
site; the development proposal; other critical areas; grading and clearing limits;
areas of proposed impacts to wetlands and/or buffers (include square footage
estimates).
b. A depiction of the proposed storm water management facilities and outlets (to
scale) for the development, including estimated areas of intrusion into the
buffers of any critical areas. The written report shall contain a discussion of the
potential impacts to the wetland(s) associated with anticipated hydroperiod
alterations from the project.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.210 Alteration of wetlands.
A. A regulated wetland or its required buffer can only be altered if the wetlands site
assessment shows that the proposed alteration does not degrade the quantitative and
qualitative functioning of the wetland, or any degradation can be adequately mitigated to
protect the wetland function. Any alteration approved pursuant to this section shall include
mitigation necessary to mitigate the impacts of the proposed alteration on the wetland as
described in BMC § 14.15.220, Wetland mitigation standards.
B. Storm water discharges to wetlands shall be controlled and treated to provide all known
and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment as mandated in the State
Water Quality Standards, chapter 173-201A WAC, as required by state law and
implemented in chapter 14.05 BMC, Surface Water Management.
C. Wetland alterations shall not result in a net loss of flood or stormwater storage capacity
within the Burlington urban growth area.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.220 Wetland mitigation standards.1.
A. Mitigation Sequencing. Before impacting any wetland or its buffer, an applicant shall
demonstrate that the following actions have been taken. Actions are listed in the order of
preference:
1. Avoid the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action.
2. Minimize impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its
implementation, by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to
avoid or reduce impacts.
1. Ratios for rehabilitation and enhancement may be reduced when combined with 1:1 replacement through creation or
reestablishment. See Table 1a, Wetland Mitigation in Washington State – Part 1: Agency Polices and Guidance –
Version 1 (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011a, Olympia, WA, March 2006 or as revised). See also subsection (D)(4) of
this section for more information on using preservation as compensation.
§ 14.15.220 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.220
3. Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment.
4. Reduce or eliminate the impact over time by preservation and maintenance
operations.
5. Compensate for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources
or environments.
6. Monitor the required compensation and take remedial or corrective measures when
necessary.
B. Requirements for Compensatory Mitigation.
1. Compensatory mitigation for alterations to wetlands shall be used only for impacts
that cannot be avoided or minimized and shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic
functions. Compensatory mitigation requirements shall be consistent with
Washington State Department of Ecology, U.S Army Corps of Engineers Seattle
District, and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Region 10 (2021) Wetland
Mitigation in Washington State – Part 1: Agency Policies and Guidance (Version 2)
(Ecology Publication No. 21-06-003), or as revised. Compensatory mitigation plans
shall be consistent with Wetland Mitigation in Washington State: Part 2 – Developing
Mitigation Plans Version 1, March 2006, Publication No. 06-06-011b, or as revised.
2. Mitigation ratios shall be consistent with subsection (G) of this section.
3. Mitigation requirements may also be determined using the credit/debit tool described
in Calculating Credits and Debits for Compensatory Mitigation in Wetlands of
Western Washington: Final Report (Ecology Publication No. 10-06-011, Olympia,
WA, March 2012, or as revised) consistent with subsection (H) this section.
C. Compensating for Lost or Affected Functions. Compensatory mitigation shall address the
functions affected by the proposed project, with an intention to achieve functional
equivalency or improvement of functions. The goal shall be for the compensatory
mitigation to provide similar wetland functions as those lost, except when either:
1. The lost wetland provides minimal functions, and the proposed compensatory
mitigation action(s) will provide equal or greater functions or will provide functions
shown to be limiting within a watershed through a formal Washington state watershed
assessment plan or protocol; or
2. Out-of-kind replacement of wetland type or functions will best meet watershed goals
formally identified by the city, such as replacement of historically diminished wetland
types.
D. Preference of Mitigation Actions. Mitigation for lost or diminished wetland and buffer
functions shall rely on the types below in the following order of preference:
1. Restoration (reestablishment and rehabilitation) of wetlands:
a. The goal of reestablishment is returning natural or historic functions to a former
wetland. Reestablishment results in a gain in wetland acres (and functions).
Activities could include removing fill material, plugging ditches, or breaking
drain tiles.
b. The goal of rehabilitation is repairing natural or historic functions of a degraded
wetland. Rehabilitation results in a gain in wetland function but does not result
in a gain in wetland acres.
2. Creation (establishment) of wetlands on disturbed upland sites such as those with
vegetative cover consisting primarily of nonnative species. Establishment results in a
gain in wetland acres. This should be attempted only when there is an adequate source
of water and it can be shown that the surface and subsurface hydrologic regime is
conducive to the wetland community that is anticipated in the design.
a. If a site is not available for wetland restoration to compensate for expected
wetland and/or buffer impacts, the approval authority may authorize creation of
a wetland and buffer upon demonstration by the applicant's qualified wetland
scientist that:
i. The hydrology and soil conditions at the proposed mitigation site are
conducive for sustaining the proposed wetland and that creation of a
wetland at the site will not likely cause hydrologic problems elsewhere;
ii. The proposed mitigation site does not contain invasive plants or noxious
weeds or that such vegetation will be completely eradicated at the site;
iii. Adjacent land uses and site conditions do not jeopardize the viability of the
proposed wetland and buffer (e.g., due to the presence of invasive plants
or noxious weeds, storm water runoff, noise, light, or other impacts); and
iv. The proposed wetland and buffer will eventually be self-sustaining with
little or no long-term maintenance.
3. Enhancement of significantly degraded wetlands in combination with restoration or
creation. Enhancement should be part of a mitigation package that includes replacing
the altered area and meeting appropriate ratio requirements. Enhancement is
undertaken for specified purposes such as water quality improvement, flood water
retention, or wildlife habitat. Applicants proposing to enhance wetlands or associated
buffers shall demonstrate:
a. How the proposed enhancement will increase the wetland's/buffer's functions;
b. How this increase in function will adequately compensate for the impacts; and
c. How all other existing wetland functions at the mitigation site will be protected.
4. Preservation. Preservation of high-quality, at-risk wetlands as compensation are
generally acceptable when done in combination with restoration, creation, or
enhancement; provided, that a minimum of 1:1 acreage replacement is provided.
Ratios for preservation in combination with other forms of mitigation generally range
from 10:1 to 20:1, as determined on a case-by-case basis, depending on the quality of
the wetlands being altered and the quality of the wetlands being preserved.
Preservation of high-quality, at-risk wetlands and habitat may be considered as the
sole means of compensation for wetland impacts when the following criteria are met:
a. The area proposed for preservation is of high quality. The following features
§ 14.15.220 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.220
may be indicative of high-quality sites:
i. Category I or II wetland rating (using the wetland rating system for
western Washington).
ii. Rare wetland type (for example, bogs, mature forested wetlands, estuarine
wetlands).
iii. The presence of habitat for priority or locally important wildlife species.
iv. Priority sites in an adopted watershed plan.
b. Wetland impacts will not have a significant adverse impact on habitat for listed
fish, or other ESA listed species.
c. There is no net loss of habitat functions within the watershed or basin.
d. Mitigation ratios for preservation as the sole means of mitigation shall generally
start at 20:1. Specific ratios should depend upon the significance of the
preservation project and the quality of the wetland resources lost.
e. Permanent preservation of the wetland and buffer will be provided through a
conservation easement or tract held by a land trust, or land in public ownership.
f. The impact area is small (generally less than one-half acre) and/or impacts are
occurring to a low-functioning system (Category III or IV wetland).
All preservation sites shall include buffer areas adequate to protect the habitat
and its functions from encroachment and degradation.
E. Location of Compensatory Mitigation. Compensatory mitigation actions shall be
conducted within the same subdrainage basin and on the site of the alteration except when
all of subsections (E)(1) through (4) of this section apply. In that case, mitigation may be
allowed off site within the subwatershed of the impact site. When considering off-site
mitigation, preference should be given to using alternative mitigation, such as a mitigation
bank, an in-lieu fee program, or advanced mitigation.
1. There are no reasonable opportunities on site or within the subdrainage basin (e.g.,
on-site options would require elimination of high-functioning upland habitat), or
opportunities on site or within the subdrainage basin do not have a high likelihood of
success based on a determination of the capacity of the site to compensate for the
impacts. Considerations should include: anticipated replacement ratios for wetland
mitigation, buffer conditions and proposed widths, available water to maintain
anticipated hydrogeomorphic classes of wetlands when restored, proposed flood
storage capacity, and potential to mitigate riparian fish and wildlife impacts (such as
connectivity).
2. On-site mitigation would require elimination of high-quality upland habitat.
3. Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or improved wetland
functions than the altered wetland.
4. Off-site locations shall be in the same subdrainage basin unless:
a. Established watershed goals for water quality, flood storage or conveyance,
habitat, or other wetland functions have been established by the city and strongly
justify location of mitigation at another site; or
b. Credits from a state-certified wetland mitigation bank are used as compensation,
and the use of credits is consistent with the terms of the certified bank
instrument; or
c. Fees are paid to an approved in-lieu fee program to compensate for the impacts.
5. Wetland mitigation banks and off-site mitigation sites located outside of the city of
Burlington's urban growth area shall only be used if necessary to accommodate an
essential public facility and only when no feasible alternatives exists.
The design for the compensatory mitigation project needs to be appropriate for its
location (i.e., position in the landscape). Therefore, compensatory mitigation should
not result in the creation, restoration, or enhancement of an atypical wetland. An
atypical wetland refers to a compensation wetland (e.g., created or enhanced) that
does not match the type of existing wetland that would be found in the geomorphic
setting of the site (i.e., the water source(s) and hydroperiod proposed for the
mitigation site are not typical for the geomorphic setting). Likewise, it should not
provide exaggerated morphology or require a berm or other engineered structures
to hold back water. For example, excavating a permanently inundated pond in an
existing seasonally saturated or inundated wetland is one example of an enhancement
project that could result in an atypical wetland. Another example would be excavating
depressions in an existing wetland on a slope, which would require the construction
of berms to hold the water.
F. Timing of Compensatory Mitigation. It is preferred that compensatory mitigation projects
be completed prior to activities that will disturb wetlands. At the least, compensatory
mitigation shall be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or
occupancy of the action or development. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed
to reduce impacts to existing fisheries, wildlife, and flora.
1. The community development director may authorize a one-time temporary delay in
completing construction or installation of the compensatory mitigation when the
applicant provides a written explanation from a qualified wetland professional as to
the rationale for the delay. An appropriate rationale would include identification of
the environmental conditions that could produce a high probability of failure or
significant construction difficulties (e.g., project delay lapses past a fisheries window,
or installing plants should be delayed until the dormant season to ensure greater
survival of installed materials). The delay shall not create or perpetuate hazardous
conditions or environmental damage or degradation, and the delay shall not be
injurious to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. The request for the
temporary delay must include a written justification that documents the
environmental constraints that include implementation of the compensatory
mitigation plan. The justification must be verified and approved by the city.
G. Wetland Mitigation Ratios:
§ 14.15.220 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.220
Category and Type of Creation or
Wetland Reestablishment Rehabilitation Enhancement
Category I: Bog, Not considered Case by case Case by case
Natural Heritage Site possible
Category I: Mature 6:1 12:1 24:1
Forested
Forested I: Based on 4:1 8:1 16:1
Functions
Category II 3:1 6:1 12:1
Category III 2:1 4:1 8:1
Category IV 1.5:1 3:1 6:1
H. Credit/Debit Method. To more fully protect functions and values, and as an alternative to
the mitigation ratios found in the joint guidance "Wetland Mitigation in Washington State
Parts I and II" (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011a and b, Olympia, WA, March 2006),
the community development director may allow mitigation based on the "credit/debit"
method developed by the Department of Ecology in "Calculating Credits and Debits for
Compensatory Mitigation in Wetlands of Western Washington: Final Report" (Ecology
Publication No. 10-06-011, Olympia, WA, March 2012, or as revised).
I. Compensatory Mitigation Report. The report must include a written report and plan sheets
that must contain, at a minimum, the following elements. Full guidance can be found in
Wetland Mitigation in Washington State – Part 2: Developing Mitigation Plans (Version 1)
(Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011b, Olympia, WA, March 2006, or as revised).
1. The written report must contain, at a minimum:
a. The name and contact information of the applicant; the name, qualifications, and
contact information for the primary author(s) of the compensatory mitigation
report; a description of the proposal; a summary of the impacts and proposed
compensation concept; identification of all the local, state, and/or federal
wetland-related permit(s) required for the project; and a vicinity map for the
project.
b. Description of how the project design has been modified to avoid, minimize, or
reduce adverse impacts to wetlands.
c. Description of the existing wetland and buffer areas proposed to be altered.
Include acreage (or square footage), water regime, vegetation, soils, landscape
position, surrounding land uses, and functions. Also describe impacts in terms
of acreage by Cowardin classification, hydrogeomorpbic classification, and
wetland rating, based on wetland ratings of this chapter.
d. Description of the compensatory mitigation site, including location and rationale
for selection. Include an assessment of existing conditions: acreage (or square
footage) of wetlands and uplands, water regime, sources of water, vegetation,
soils, landscape position, surrounding land uses, and functions.
e. A description of the proposed actions for compensation of wetland and upland
areas affected by the project. Include overall goals of the proposed mitigation
including a description of the targeted functions, hydrogeomorphic
classification, and categories of wetlands.
f. A description of the proposed mitigation construction activities and timing of
activities.
g. A discussion of ongoing management practices that will protect wetlands after
the project site has been developed, including proposed monitoring and
maintenance programs (for remaining wetlands and compensatory mitigation
wetlands).
h. A bond estimate for the entire compensatory mitigation project, including the
following elements: site preparation, plant materials, construction materials,
installation oversight, maintenance twice per year for up to five years, annual
monitoring field work and reporting, and contingency actions for a maximum of
the total required number of years for monitoring.
i. Proof of establishment of notice on title for the wetlands and buffers on the
project site, including the compensatory mitigation areas.
j. Identify flood and stormwater storage impacts, water quality impacts, and
floodplain habitat impacts affecting ESA-listed species. The mitigation report
shall demonstrate how the proposed mitigation measures will prevent a net loss
of floodplain habitat, water quality, and flood and stormwater storage functions
and values.
2. The scaled plan sheets for the compensatory mitigation must contain, at a minimum:
a. Surveyed edges of the existing wetland and buffers, proposed areas of wetland
and/or buffer impacts, location of proposed wetland and/or buffer compensation
actions.
b. Existing topography, ground-proofed, at two-foot contour intervals in the zone
of the proposed compensation actions if any grading activity is proposed to
create the compensation area(s). Also existing cross-sections of on-site wetland
areas that are proposed to be altered, and cross-section(s) (estimated one-foot
intervals) for the proposed areas of wetland or buffer compensation.
c. Surface and subsurface hydrologic conditions, including an analysis of existing
and proposed hydrologic regimes for enhanced, created, or restored
compensatory mitigation areas. Also, illustrations of how data for existing
hydrologic conditions were used to determine the estimates of future hydrologic
conditions.
d. Conditions expected from the proposed actions on site, including future
hydrogeomorphic types, vegetation community types by dominant species
(wetland and upland), and future water regimes.
e. Required wetland buffers for existing wetlands and proposed compensation
areas. Also, identify any zones where buffers are proposed to be reduced or
enlarged outside of the standards identified in this chapter.
§ 14.15.220 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.220
f. A plant schedule for the compensation area, including all species by proposed
community type and water regime, size and type of plant material to be installed,
spacing of plants, typical clustering patterns, total number of each species by
community type, timing of installation.
g. Performance standards (measurable standards reflective of years post-
installation) for upland and wetland communities, monitoring schedule, and
maintenance schedule and actions by each biennium.
J. Buffer Mitigation Ratios. Impacts to buffers shall be mitigated at a 1:1 ratio. Compensatory
buffer mitigation shall replace those buffer functions lost from development.
K. Protection of the Mitigation Site. The area where the mitigation occurred and any
associated buffer shall be located in a critical area tract or a conservation easement or land
in public ownership.
L. Monitoring. Mitigation monitoring shall be required for a period necessary to establish that
performance standards have been met, but not for a period less than five years. If a scrub-
shrub or forested vegetation community is proposed, monitoring may be required for 10
years or more. The project mitigation plan shall include monitoring elements that ensure
certainty of success for the project's natural resource values and functions. If the mitigation
goals are not obtained within the initial five-year period, the applicant remains responsible
for restoration of the natural resource values and functions until the mitigation goals agreed
to in the mitigation plan are achieved.
M. Wetland Mitigation Banks.
1. Credits from a wetland mitigation bank may be approved for use as compensation for
unavoidable impacts to wetlands when:
a. The bank is certified under state rules;
b. The city determines that the wetland mitigation bank provides appropriate
compensation for the authorized impacts; and
c. The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the
certified bank instrument;
d. The proposed development activity involves an essential public facility and
there are no feasible mitigation alternatives to the use of wetland mitigation
bank credits.
2. Replacement ratios for projects using bank credits shall be consistent with
replacement ratios specified in the certified bank instrument.
3. Credits from a certified wetland mitigation bank may be used to compensate for
impacts located within the service area specified in the certified bank instrument. In
some cases, the service area of the bank may include portions of more than one
adjacent drainage basin for specific wetland functions.
N. In-Lieu Fee. To aid in the implementation of off-site mitigation, the city may develop an
in-lieu fee program. This program shall be developed and approved through a public
process and be consistent with federal rules, state policy on in-lieu fee mitigation, and state
water quality regulations. An approved in-lieu fee program sells compensatory mitigation
credits to permittees whose obligation to provide compensatory mitigation is then
transferred to the in-lieu program sponsor, a governmental or nonprofit natural resource
management entity. Credits from an approved in-lieu fee program may be used when
subsections (N)(1) through (6) of this section apply:
1. The approval authority determines that it would provide environmentally appropriate
compensation for the proposed impacts.
2. The mitigation will occur on a site identified using the site selection and prioritization
process in the approved in-lieu fee program instrument.
3. The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the
approved in-lieu fee program instrument.
4. Land acquisition and initial physical and biological improvements of the mitigation
site must be completed within three years of the credit sale.
5. Projects using in-lieu fee credits shall have debits associated with the proposed
impacts calculated by the applicant's qualified wetland scientist using the method
consistent with the credit assessment method specified in the approved instrument for
the in-lieu fee program.
6. Credits from an approved in-lieu fee program may be used to compensate for impacts
located within the service area specified in the approved in-lieu fee instrument.
O. Advance Mitigation. Mitigation for projects with pre-identified impacts to wetlands may
be constructed in advance of the impacts if the mitigation is implemented according to
federal rules, state policy on advance mitigation, and state water quality regulations.
P. Exceptions to Mitigation Requirements. Requirements for mitigation do not apply under
the following circumstances:
1. When a wetland alteration is intended exclusively for the enhancement or restoration
of an existing regulated wetland and the proposal will not result in a loss of wetland
function and value, subject to the following conditions:
a. The enhancement or restoration project shall not be associated with a
development activity.
b. An enhancement or restoration plan shall be submitted for site plan review. The
restoration or enhancement plan must include the information required under
this title.
2. When a wetland is a part of a development activity that is permitted by the Corps of
Engineers NWP permitting crossing of wetlands as part of road construction.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)
§ 14.15.230 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.240
Article III
Aquifer Recharge Areas

14.15.230 Aquifer recharge areas.
A. Intent. This section establishes areas determined to be critical in maintaining both ground
water quantity and quality. This section specifies regulatory requirements to be enacted
when development within these areas is proposed to occur and provides a methodology by
which the level of review and any mitigation required is determined. The intent of this
section is to:
1. Define minimum regulatory requirements to protect ground water quality and
quantity for existing and future use; and
2. Identify the practices, alternatives, or mitigations that can minimize the adverse
impacts of proposed projects; and
3. Ensure adequate design, construction, management, and operations to protect ground
water quality and quantity.
B. Existing and future beneficial uses of ground water shall be maintained and protected and
degradation of ground water quality that would interfere with or become injurious to
beneficial uses shall be avoided or minimized.
C. Wherever ground waters are determined to be of a higher quality than the criteria
established for said waters under this section, the existing water quality shall be protected,
and contaminants that will reduce the existing quality thereof shall not be allowed to enter
such waters, except in those instances where it can be demonstrated that:
1. An overriding consideration of the public interest will be served; and
2. All contaminants proposed for entry into said ground water(s) shall be provided with
all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment
prior to entry.
D. It is the intent of this regulation to be consistent with and implement the requirements of
chapters 90.48 and 90.54 RCW, and chapters 173-160,173-200, 173-201A, 246-290 and
246-291 WAC, as the same may hereafter be amended.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.240 Aquifer recharge area designations.
Two categories are designated for aquifer recharge areas. These categories are designated to
assist the city in determining the level of assessment necessary to evaluate specific proposed
land use actions. The categories are based on the determination that certain areas require
additional scrutiny of the potential impacts of a proposed land use with consideration given to
hydrogeologic vulnerability. All designated areas are subject to change as data and information
are updated or become available.
A. Designation Categories.
1. Category I areas are those so designated because of the need to provide them special
protection due to a specific preexisting land use, or because they are identified by the
local, state or federal government as areas in need of special aquifer protection where
a proposed land use may pose a potential risk which increases aquifer vulnerability.
Category I includes areas served by ground water which have been designated as
a "Sole Source Aquifer Area" under the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act; areas
identified within a "closed" or "low-flow" stream watershed designated by the
Department of Ecology pursuant to chapter 90.22 RCW; areas identified by the
Department of Ecology as sea water intrusion areas; and areas designated as
"Wellhead Protection Areas" pursuant to WAC 246-290-135(4) and the ground water
contribution area in WAC 246-291-100(2)(e). Wellhead protection areas shall, for the
purpose of this regulation, include the identified recharge areas associated with either
Group A public water supply wells, those Group B wells with a wellhead protection
plan filed with the Skagit County health department, or plats served by five or more
individual wells where the average lot size is equal to or less than two acres for which
a wellhead protection plan has been completed and filed with the Skagit County
health department. Category I areas are shown on the Aquifer Recharge Area map.
2. Category II is designated as areas not identified as Category I areas.
3. When any portion of the proposed project area lies partly within a Category I area,
the proposed project shall be subject to the level of scrutiny provided for Category I
area.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.250 Aquifer recharge applicability and prohibited activities.
A. Applicability. All development projects are subject to the provisions of this section except
for the following:
1. Existing activities that currently and legally exist at the time this chapter became
effective. However, expansions or changes in use are subject to this section and the
review process contained herein.
2. The construction of a single detached dwelling, duplex, or related accessory uses on
an existing legally established lot located outside Category I areas.
3. Single-family residential building permits where a site assessment report was required
to be completed for the land division, in which case, to meet the conditions of this
exemption, the applicant must comply with the recorded plat notes and the applicable
mitigations contained in the site assessment report.
B. Prohibited Activities. The following activities are prohibited in Category I areas due to the
probability and/or potential magnitude of their adverse effects on ground water:
1. Landfill activities as defined in chapters 173-304 and 173-351 WAC.
2. Class V injection wells, including:
a. Agricultural drainage wells;
b. Untreated sewage waste disposal wells;
c. Cesspools;
§ 14.15.250 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.270
d. Industrial process water and disposal wells; and
e. Radioactive waste disposal.
3. Radioactive disposal sites.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.260 Aquifer recharge initial project review.
A. General Procedures. Applicants for all development projects not allowed under this title
shall be required, through a site assessment report prepared pursuant to this title, to evaluate
potential impacts to aquifer recharge areas, and appropriate mitigation measures to reduce
or eliminate the potential for adversely impacting aquifer recharge areas shall be identified.
The level of study and report detail required will be determined by the city based on the
type of land use being proposed, the designated aquifer recharge area category, and the
vulnerability of the underlying aquifer(s) to contamination. The goal of this section is to
require applicants to identify and characterize vulnerability only to the level necessary to
determine appropriate mitigation measures necessary, to either reduce potential adverse
impacts to established parameters or eliminate potential adverse impacts to underlying
aquifer(s).
B. Scoping. The level of study which will be required shall be based on an initial project
review that may include staff from the county health department, State Health Department,
State Department of Ecology, and a hydrogeologist.
Elements for the report that are required at a minimum and other elements that may be
required as part of the scope for the study are listed in this title. Subsequent findings
from the study or other information made available after the initial project review may
obligate the applicant to additional evaluation, development of a mitigation plan, and/or
development of a ground water monitoring plan. The following outlines the review process:
1. The required scope of the site assessment report shall be determined by the city
following consultation with the county health department and appropriate state
agencies. The scope of site assessment required may be conveyed to the applicant
and/or his or her representative in writing.
2. The site assessment report shall be submitted and renewed by city. The city may
consult with the county health department and appropriate state agencies as necessary
and may approve the site assessment report as submitted, require additional
evaluation, or require development of a mitigation plan. If additional information is
required beyond the initial site assessment report, the applicant may be notified in
writing.
3. When, to the satisfaction of the city, all information is provided and appropriate
mitigation measures have been identified in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, the permit review process may move forward.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.270 Aquifer recharge site assessment report.
A. The scope of the site assessment report shall be based on the initial project review specified
in this title. The scope of the report may be reduced by utilizing appropriate mitigation
measures, or if the water quality or quantity issue(s) are already known.
B. The site assessment report shall be prepared by or under the direction of and signed by a
professional engineer, licensed in the state of Washington, trained and qualified to analyze
geologic, hydrologic, and ground water flow systems; or by a geologist or hydrogeologist
who earns his or her livelihood from the field of geology and/or hydrogeology and has
received a degree in geological sciences from an accredited four-year institution of higher
education and who has relevant training and experience analyzing geologic, hydrologic,
and ground water flow systems.
C. Site Assessment Report Requirements. A site plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements of this code. In addition, a site assessment report shall include:
1. A description of the project including those activities, practices, materials, or
chemicals that have a potential to adversely affect the quantity or quality of
underlying aquifer(s).
2. Identification of appropriate mitigation measures and description of how they will
prevent degradation of underlying aquifer(s).
3. A site plan or another appropriately scaled map showing the approximate location of
known or geologically representative well(s) (abandoned and active), spring(s), and
surface watercourses within 1,000 feet of the subject project property. All well logs
available through the health department for identified wells within 1,000 feet of the
project property shall be included.
4. A description of the site-specific hydrogeologic characteristics regarding impact to
the quantity or quality of underlying aquifer(s). At a minimum this will include a
description of the lithology, depth to and static water level of known underlying
aquifer(s), and depiction of ground water flow direction and patterns on the
appropriate map.
5. Identification of the initial receptors of potential adverse impacts located
hydraulically downgradient from the project within 1,000 feet or as otherwise
required by the scoping process identified above.
D. Additional Site Assessment Elements. After the initial project review, one or more of the
site assessment elements listed below may be required based upon the proposed project
activity, aquifer recharge area classification, complexity of underlying hydrogeologic
conditions, and/or the perceived potential to adversely impact hydraulically downgradient
receptors. One or more of these additional elements may also be required if the applicant
chooses to demonstrate that certain mitigation measures are not necessary to protect the
quantity or quality of the underlying aquifer(s), or that the project does not pose a
detrimental risk to hydraulically downgradient receptors.
1. Lithologic characteristics and stratigraphic relationships of the affected aquifer(s) and
overlying geologic units (includes soil types) including thickness, horizontal and
vertical extent, permeability, and infiltration rates of surface soils.
2. Delineation of identified structural features such as faults, fractures, and fissures.
3. Aquifer characteristics including determination of recharge and discharge areas,
transmissivity, storage, hydraulic conductivity, porosity, and estimate of ground water
§ 14.15.270 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.280
flow direction, velocity and patterns for the affected aquifer(s).
4. Estimate of precipitation, evaporation, and evapotranspiration rates for the project
area.
5. Preparation of appropriate hydrogeologic cross sections depicting at a minimum
underlying lithology and stratigraphy, aquifer(s), and potential or probable
contaminant pathways from a chemical release.
6. Contaminant fate and transport including probable migration pathways and travel
time of potential contaminant release(s) from the site through the unsaturated zone to
the aquifer(s) and through the aquifer(s), and how the contaminant(s) may be
attenuated within the unsaturated zone and the aquifer(s). Includes consideration of
advection, dispersion, and diffusion of contaminants in the ground water.
7. Delineation of areas potentially affected by contaminant migration on the ground
surface and/or through the affected aquifer(s).
8. Determination of background or existing ground water quality underlying the project
area.
9. Development of a ground water monitoring program to measure potential impacts of
the development to underlying aquifer(s).
10. Development of a spill plan and/or contingency plan describing the specific actions,
which will be taken if a release of a contaminant(s) occurs, or if ground water
monitoring results indicate a contaminant(s) from the site has entered the underlying
aquifer(s).
11. The degree of continuity between ground water and nearby surface water including
potential impact to "closed" or "low-flow" streams (as described in this title) from
proposed ground water withdrawals, and potential impacts to surface water quality
from site runoff or contaminated ground water discharge.
12. In conjunction with the Department of Ecology seawater intrusion policy and
subsequent policies or ordinances, applicable projects shall be required to determine
appropriate pumping rates and schedules that maintain dynamic drawdown levels
above mean sea level.
13. Applicable projects such as special use permits, short plats, or long plats shall test
existing and/or test wells for nitrate levels and where appropriate calculate the nitrate
loading rate at full build-out of the project. If the calculated nitrate loading in the
intended water supply equals or exceeds five mg/L nitrate as nitrogen, the proposal
will need to develop a mitigation plan. The point of compliance shall be determined
based on project specifics.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.280 Aquifer recharge area mitigation.
A. The city in consultation with the county health department shall review development
proposals to assess aquifer(s) vulnerability and establish needed mitigation. Where
determined to be necessary through the site assessment process, development approvals
shall include conditions designed to prevent significant degradation of water quality or
reduction in water quantity in aquifer recharge areas. The project shall not cause
degradation of the ground water quality below the standards described in chapter 173-200
WAC or Department of Ecology's seawater intrusion policy.
B. Wellhead Protection Mitigation. Where a wellhead protection plan that addresses the
project area exists, the city and/or health officer shall use the recommendations contained
in the wellhead protection plan as a basis for formulating mitigations. In the absence of
such a mitigation plan, the county health department and Public Utility District No. 1 shall
jointly develop recommended mitigations, for review by the city, a summary of which shall
be signed by the applicant and recorded with the applicant's property title. All new
development shall be required to connect to the Public Utility District No. 1 Water System.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)
§ 14.15.300 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.310
Article IV
Geologically Hazardous Areas

14.15.300 Geologically hazardous area designation.
A. Geologically hazardous areas include erosion hazards, landslide hazards, mine hazards,
volcanic hazards and seismic hazards, and shall be designated consistent with the
definitions provided in WAC 365-190-080(4).
B. Geologically hazardous areas shall be classified as "known or suspected risk," or "unknown
risk."
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.310 Geologically hazardous area initial project review.
A site visit shall be conducted by the city to determine whether: (A) "Areas of known or
suspected risk" identified below are or may be present within 300 feet of the project or activity;
(B) the proposed project or activity is or may be within a distance from the base of an adjacent
landslide hazard area equal to the vertical relief of said hazard area; (C) the proposed activity
may result in or contribute to an increase in hazard; and (D) whether the project or hazard areas
pose a risk to life, property, or other critical areas on or off the project area sufficient to require a
site assessment. The city may require that the site visit be conducted by a licensed geotechnical
professional. Areas of known or suspected risk:
A. Erosion Hazard Indicators.
1. Those project areas located within 300 feet of map unit delineations No. 51 Dystic
Xerorthents, No. 99 Mundt and No. 117 Saxon or mapped as moderate to severe,
severe or very severe erosion hazard or as having severe rill and inter-rill erosion
hazard as identified in the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources
Conservation Service Soil Survey of Skagit County Area, WA (1989) or most
currently adopted.
2. Those project areas that fall within any soil sloping greater than or equal to 30 percent.
3. The project area falls within areas designated in the Department of Ecology, Coastal
Zone Atlas, Washington, Volume Two Skagit County (1978 or most currently
adopted) as U (Unstable), UB (Unstable Bluff), URS (Unstable Recent Slide), or UOS
(Unstable Old Slide).
4. Those project areas that may be considered to have an erosion hazard as a result of
rapid stream incision or stream bank erosion.
B. Landslide Hazard Indicators.
1. The project area falls within or 300 feet from areas designated in the Department of
Ecology, Coastal Zone Atlas, Washington, Volume Two, Skagit County (1978 or
most currently adopted) as U (Unstable), UB (Unstable Bluff), URS (Unstable Recent
Slide), or UOS (Unstable Old Slide);
2. The project area falls within or 300 feet from slopes having the following
characteristics: gradients of 15 percent or greater intersecting geologic contacts with
permeable sediments overlying low permeability sediment or bedrock and springs or
ground water seepage are present;
3. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any area having a 40 percent slope or
steeper and with a vertical relief of 10 feet or more;
4. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any areas of historic failure such as
areas designated as quaternary earth slumps, earthflows, mudflows, lahars, debris
flows, rock slides, landslides or other slope failures on maps or technical reports
published by the U.S. Geological Survey such as topographic or geologic maps, or
the Geology and Earth Resources Division of the Washington Department of Natural
Resources, or other documents authorized by government agencies;
5. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any areas potentially unstable as a result
of rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, and undercutting by wave action shall
be addressed as a flood hazard consistent with this chapter;
6. Areas that have shown movement during the Holocene epoch or which are underlain
or covered by wastage debris of that epoch;
7. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any slopes that are parallel or sub-
parallel to planes of weakness (such as bedding planes, joint systems, and fault
planes) in subsurface materials;
8. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any slopes with a gradient greater than
80 percent and subject to rock fall during seismic shaking;
9. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any areas that show evidence of or are
at risk from snow avalanches.
C. Seismic Hazards. Seismic hazard areas shall include areas that are subject to severe risk of
damage as a result of earthquake induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, soil
liquefaction or surface faulting.
1. The project includes structures (as defined in the International Building Code)
proposed to be located in any of the areas described in subsection (A) or (B) of this
section or located in areas to have a potential for soil liquefaction and soil strength
loss during ground shaking as identified on the U.S. Geologic Survey Relative Slope
Stability Map of the Port Townsend Quadrangle, Puget Sound Region, Washington
(1985 or most currently adopted), or as identified in the field. A geologic hazard site
assessment is not required for soil liquefaction and soil strength loss resulting from
seismic activity unless other criteria provided in this section apply. The building
official shall require evaluation using the provisions set forth in the adopted building
code.
2. The structures or critical facilities are proposed to be located on a Holocene fault line.
(No critical facilities shall be located on a Holocene fault line as indicated on
investigative maps or described in studies by the United States Geologic Survey,
Geology and Earth Resources Division of the Washington Department of Natural
Resources or other documents authorized by government agencies, or as identified in
the field.) All developments on a Holocene fault line shall require a disclosure
statement indicating the property is located on an active fault and may be geologically
hazardous.
§ 14.15.310 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.320
D. Volcanic Hazards. The project area is located in a volcanic hazard zone for Glacier Peak,
Washington (Open-File Report 95-499); or in a volcanic hazard area of Mount Baker,
Washington (Open-File Report 95-498). A site assessment is not required for volcanic
hazard areas unless other criteria provided in this section apply.
E. Other Geologic Hazard Indicators.
1. The project area falls within or 300 feet from an alluvial fan as designated on the
Skagit County Alluvial Fan Study Orthophoto Maps;
2. The project area falls within or 300 feet from a mine hazard area as designated on the
Department of Natural Resources Map: Coal Measures of Skagit County (1924) or
within 300 feet of any other current or historic mine operations determined to be
geologic hazards as described in this title, geologically hazardous areas;
3. Areas of Unknown Geologic Hazards. As part of any development application where
no current information is available to confirm that the items identified in this section
are present on the project area, the critical areas review required by this chapter shall
provide a description of the known and visible site features and be used by the city in
evaluating whether a geologically hazardous area site assessment is required pursuant
to this section.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.320 Geologically hazardous area site assessment requirements.
A. Site Visit Determination. A determination shall be made as follows:
1. No Site Assessment. Where the city determines that the project or activity area has no
potential for impacting adjacent ownership and property, other types of critical areas,
public property (such as roads and other facilities) or living quarters of any kind,
including any existing or proposed off site, no additional site assessments shall be
required prior to approval under the provisions of this chapter.
2. Site Assessment Required. If the city determines during the site visit that the proposed
development activity falls within 300 feet of an "Area of Known or Suspected Risk"
and the geologic condition may pose a risk to life and property on or off the project
area, then a geologically hazardous area site assessment of the project area by a
qualified professional as described in subsection (B) of this section shall be required
as part of the complete development permit application.
3. Burlington Hill Special Management Area. A site assessment report shall be prepared
for all proposed development activities within the Burlington Hill special
management area.
B. Geologically Hazardous Area Site Assessment. Site assessment reports shall be prepared
by a geotechnical professional.
The geologically hazardous area site assessment report shall classify the type of hazard
in accordance with this title. The site assessment report shall include the following as
appropriate:
1. A site plan must be prepared in accordance with the development permit
requirements. The site plan shall depict the height of slope, slope gradient and cross
section of the site. The site plan shall indicate the location of all existing structures,
proposed structures and any significant known geologic features on the subject site.
The site plan shall also include the location of springs, seeps, or other surface
expressions of ground water. The site plan shall also depict any evidence of surface
water or storm water runoff;
2. A detailed description of the project, its relationship to potential geologic hazard(s),
and its potential impact upon the hazard area(s), the subject property and adjacent
properties. The description shall make a determination if a geologically hazardous
area(s) is present on the subject site.
The narrative shall include a full discussion of the geologic factors and conditions on
the subject site resulting in the qualified professional's conclusions;
3. An assessment of the geologic characteristics and engineering properties of the soils,
sediments, and/or rock of the subject property and potentially affected adjacent
properties. Soils analysis shall be accomplished in accordance with the Unified Soil
Classification System;
4. A description of load intensity including surface water and ground water conditions,
public and private sewage disposal systems, fills and excavations and all structural
development;
5. An assessment describing the extent and type of vegetative cover to include tree
attitude;
6. For potential landslide hazards: estimate slope stability and the effect construction
and placement of structures will have on the slope over the estimated life of the
structure. Quantitative analysis of slope stability or slope stability modeling may be
required by the city;
7. Additional site assessment standards may be required if necessary to demonstrate
compliance with this chapter.
C. Site Assessment Conclusions.
1. Where the geotechnical professional determines that a geologically hazardous
condition is not present on the subject site and/or will not occur as a result of the
proposed project, will have no potential for impacting adjacent ownership and
property, other types of critical areas, public property (such as roads and other
facilities) or living quarters of any kind, including any existing or proposed off site,
no additional site assessments shall be required prior to approval under the provisions
of this chapter. The qualified professional shall be required to certify that a geologic
hazard is not present on the subject parcel.
2. Properties containing geologically hazardous conditions shall require a geologically
hazardous area mitigation plan. Essential public facilities shall not be sited within
designated geologically hazardous areas (Exception: volcanic hazard areas). No
residential structures shall be located in geologically hazardous areas or their buffers
that cannot be fully mitigated.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)
§ 14.15.330 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.330

14.15.330 Geologically hazardous area mitigation standards.
The mitigation plan shall be prepared by a geotechnical professional and include a discussion
on how the project has been designed to avoid and minimize the impacts. The plan shall also
make a recommendation for the minimum building setback from any bluff or slope edge and/
or other geologic hazard shall be based upon the geotechnical analysis required under this title.
Mitigation plans shall include the location and methods of drainage, locations and methods
of erosion control, a vegetation management and/or restoration plan and/or other means for
maintaining long-term stability of geologic hazards. The plan shall also address the potential
impact of mitigation on the hazard area, the subject property and affected adjacent properties.
The mitigation plan must be approved by the city and be implemented as a condition of project
approval.
Within designated geologic hazards, mitigation plans shall address the appropriate items listed
below as required by the site assessment. One or more of the following mitigation standards shall
be included as components of a mitigation plan pursuant to the requirements of this title, site
assessment report. Other mitigation standards, other than those listed below, may be required
depending on the geologic hazard and the site conditions.
A. Mitigation Standards.
1. A temporary erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with the
requirements of this title, surface water management, as amended.
2. A drainage plan for the collection, transport, treatment, discharge and/or recycle of
water in accordance with the requirements of this title, surface water management, as
amended.
3. All proposals involving excavations and placement of fills shall be subject to
structural review under the appropriate provisions as found in the International
Building Code.
4. Critical facilities shall not be sited within designated geologically hazardous areas.
(Exception: volcanic hazard areas.)
5. Surface drainage shall not be directed across the face of a landslide hazard (including
ravines). If drainage must be discharged from the hazard area into adjacent waters, it
shall be collected above the hazard and directed to the water by tight line drain and
provided with an energy dissipating device at the point of discharge.
6. All infiltration systems such as storm water detention and retention facilities, and
curtain drains utilizing buried pipe or French drain, are prohibited in geologically
hazardous areas and their buffers unless a site assessment report indicates such
facilities or systems will not affect slope stability and the systems are designed by a
licensed civil engineer. The engineer shall also certify that the system and/or facilities
are installed as designed.
7. Vegetation Removal and Replanting. Removal of vegetation in landslide hazard,
erosion hazard and coastal bluff hazard areas shall be minimized. Any replanting that
occurs shall consist of trees, shrubs, and ground cover that is compatible with the
existing surrounding vegetation, meets the objectives of erosion prevention and site
stabilization, and does not require permanent irrigation for long-term survival.
8. A minimum buffer with a width of 30 feet shall be established from the top, toe and
all edges of all landslide hazardous areas. Existing native vegetation shall be
maintained in accordance with mitigation recommendations within the buffer area.
Any modifications to the buffer requirement shall be based on the report and
recommendations of the professional geologist under supervision of a licensed
professional engineer. The buffer may be reduced to a minimum of 10 feet when an
applicant demonstrates to the director that the reduction will adequately protect the
proposed development, adjacent developments and uses and the subject critical area.
The buffer may be increased by the community development director for
development adjacent to a ravine which is designated as unstable on the Coastal Zone
Atlas, Washington, Volume Two Skagit County (1978 or most current edition) or
where a larger buffer is necessary to prevent risk of damage to proposed and existing
development (as in the case where the area potentially impacted by a landslide
exceeds 30 feet). Normal nondestructive pruning and trimming of vegetation for
maintenance purposes, or thinning of limbs of individual trees to provide a view
corridor, shall not be subject to these buffer requirements.
9. Seismic Hazard Areas. Structural development proposals shall meet all applicable
provisions of the International Building Code.
The city shall evaluate documentation submitted including the site assessment report,
and condition permit approvals to minimize the risk on both the subject property and
affected adjacent properties. All conditions on approvals shall be based on known,
available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control and treatment. Evaluation of
geotechnical reports may also constitute grounds for denial of the proposal.
B. Alterations of the Buffer and/or Geologically Hazardous Area. Alterations of the buffer
and/or geologically hazardous area may occur for development meeting the following
criteria:
1. No reasonable alternative exists; and
2. A site assessment report is submitted and certifies that:
a. There is a minimal hazard as proven by evidence of no landslide activity in the
past in the vicinity of the proposed development and a qualitative analysis of
slope stability indicates no significant risk to the development proposal and
adjacent properties; or the geologically hazardous area can be modified or the
development proposal can be designed so that the hazard is eliminated or
mitigated so that the site is as safe as a site without a geologically hazardous
area;
b. The development will not significantly increase surface water discharge or
sedimentation to adjacent properties beyond predevelopment conditions;
c. The development will not decrease slope stability on adjacent properties; and
d. Such alterations will not adversely impact other critical areas.
C. Noncompliance and Failed Mitigation Plans.
1. Projects found to be in noncompliance with the mitigation conditions issued as part
of the development approval are subject to enforcement actions necessary to bring the
§ 14.15.330 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.330
development into compliance with this chapter.
2. Mitigation plans which do not fulfill the performance required based on the site
assessment/geotechnical report findings or otherwise fail to meet the intent of this
chapter shall be revised and the subject development brought into compliance with
the revised mitigation plan.
3. Mitigation Plan Certification. Upon completion of the project, a qualified professional
shall certify that the mitigation plan has been properly implemented. The certification
shall be required prior to final approval of the project by the director.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)
§ 14.15.350 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.350
Article V
Fish And Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas

14.15.350 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area designations.
A. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas (HCAs) shall be designated and classified as
provided for in the definition section of this chapter. The map and species references
indicated are intended to serve only as a guide during development review. In all cases,
actual presence or absence for the listed species or habitat shall prevail.
B. In addition to the HCAs, additional species and habitats of local importance may be
designated by the community development director based on declining populations,
sensitivity to habitat manipulation or special value including but not limited to commercial,
game or public appeal.
C. In order to nominate an area or a species to the category of habitats and species of local
importance, an individual or organization must:
1. Demonstrate a need for special consideration based on:
a. Declining population,
b. Sensitivity to habitat manipulation, or
c. Commercial or game value or other special value, such as public appeal.
2. Propose relevant management strategies considered effective and within the scope of
this chapter; and
3. Provide species habitat location(s) on a map (scale 1:24,000). Submitted proposals
will be reviewed by the community development director and forwarded to the
Departments of Fish and Wildlife, Natural Resources, and/or other county and state
agencies or experts for comments and recommendations regarding accuracy of data
and effectiveness of proposed management strategies. A public hearing will be held
for proposals found to be complete, accurate, and potentially effective and within the
scope of this chapter. Approved nominations will become designated "Habitats/
Species of Local Importance" and will be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
D. The following species and habitats have been designated on a site-specific basis according
to the official Species and Habitats of Local Significance Map:
1. Great blue heron nest sites;
2. Vaux's swifts communal roosts;
3. Pileated woodpecker nest sites;
4. Osprey nest sites;
5. Townsend big-eared bat communal roosts;
6. Cavity nesting ducks breeding areas;
7. Trumpeter swan concentrations;
§ 14.15.350 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.370
8. Harlequin duck breeding areas;
9. Waterfowl concentrations;
10. Special management areas.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.360 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas initial project review.
A. A site visit shall be conducted to determine whether HCAs identified on a critical area
checklist or on available map resources or whether HCAa not previously identified are
present within 300 feet of the project or activity site.
B. Habitat conservation areas are designated by definition in this title and are referenced as
follows:
1. An area with which anadromous fish, endangered, threatened or sensitive species
have a primary association and/or their habitat such as those designated and mapped
by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife, Priority Habitats and
Species Program;
2. A water of the state as defined under WAC 222-16-030;
3. A Critical Biological Area as designated and mapped by the Department of Ecology
Coastal Zone Atlas dated June 1978 and/or the maps;
4. Designated species and habitats of local importance, including but not limited to the
Gages Slough, Burlington Hill, and Skagit River Corridor special management areas;
5. Naturally occurring ponds under 20 acres and their submerged aquatic beds that
provide fish or wildlife habitat;
6. Lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a government or tribal
entity;
7. Areas with which anadromous fish species have a primary association; and
8. State Natural Area Preserves and Natural Resource Conservation Areas.
C. If the director determines through the site visit described in subsection (A) of this section
that a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area (HCA) may be present within 300 feet of
the proposed project or activity area, then a site assessment/habitat management plan shall
be required as part of the complete application.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.370 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area site assessment requirements.
Site assessment/habitat management plans shall be prepared by a qualified fish and wildlife
biologist with experience assessing the relevant species and habitats and include, at a minimum,
the following requirements:
A. Site plan prepared in accordance with the permit requirements indicating all fish and
wildlife habitat conservation areas falling within 300 feet of the subject property. This site
plan may be prepared by the applicant subject to review by the qualified fish and wildlife
biologist;
B. Project narrative describing the proposal including, but not limited to, associated grading
and filling, structures, utilities, adjacent land uses, description of vegetation both within
and adjacent to the habitat conservation area, and when deemed necessary by the
administrative officer, surface and subsurface hydrologic analysis;
C. Impact analysis identifying and documenting the presence of all habitat conservation areas
and discussing the project's effects on the fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;
D. Regulatory analysis including a discussion of any federal, state, tribal, and/or local
requirements or special management recommendations which have been developed for
species and/or habitats located on the site;
E. Mitigation report including a discussion of proposed measures of mitigating adverse
impacts of the project and an evaluation of their potential effectiveness. Measures may
include but are not limited to: establishment of buffer zones, preservation of critically
important plants, and trees, limitation of access to habitat area, seasonal restrictions of
construction activities, establishment of a timetable for periodic review of the plan and/or
establishment of performance or maintenance bonds;
F. Management and maintenance practices including a discussion of ongoing maintenance
practices that will assure protection of all fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas on
site after the project has been completed. This section should include a discussion of
proposed monitoring criteria, methods and schedule;
G. Approval of any activity that can adversely affect fish and wildlife habitat conservation
areas shall conform to the requirements set forth in this title.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.380 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area mitigation standards.
Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall be protected in accordance with local
determination of appropriate conditions considering the site-specific recommendations from
agencies with jurisdictions over the specific area, which may include but not be limited to the
Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW), Department of Ecology, federally
recognized Indian tribes located within Skagit County, WDFW Management Recommendations
for Washington Priority Habitats and Species, and site-specific information supplied by the
applicant.
Development proposals shall be reviewed for potential impacts to fish and wildlife habitat
conservation areas. The determination of potential impacts shall be dictated by site conditions
and be made in consultation with the Washington State Departments of Ecology, Fish and
Wildlife and Natural Resources and federally recognized Indian tribes located in Skagit County.
If it is determined that a proposed project may have an adverse effect on a fish and wildlife
habitat conservation area, the applicant shall implement a habitat management plan including
mitigation measures in conformity with the performance standards outlined below.
A. Riparian Performance Standards. Riparian buffer areas shall be established from the
ordinary high water mark. The intent of riparian buffers is to protect five basic riparian
forest functions that influence in-stream and near-stream habitat quality. These are:
§ 14.15.380 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.380
1. Recruitment of large woody debris (LWD) to the stream: LWD recruitment creates
habitat structures necessary to maintain salmon/trout productive capacity and species
diversity.
2. Shade. Shading by the forest canopy maintains cooler water temperatures and
influences the availability of oxygen for salmon/trout.
3. Bank Integrity (Root Reinforcement). Bank integrity helps maintain habitat quality
and water quality by reducing bank erosion and creating habitat structure and
instream hiding cover for salmon and trout.
4. Runoff Filtration. Filtration of nutrients and sediments in runoff (surface and shallow
subsurface flows) helps maintain water quality.
5. Wildlife Habitat. Functional wildlife habitat for riparian-dependent species is based
on sufficient amounts of riparian vegetation to provide protection for nesting and
feeding.
B. Standard Riparian Buffers. Appropriate management zones or buffers shall be applied to
all stream types. Management zone boundaries and required buffer widths shall be
established using the following: Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife
guidelines: (Rentz, R., A. Windrope, K. Folkerts, and J. Azerrad. 2020. Riparian
Ecosystems, Volume 2: Management Recommendations. Habitat Program, Washington
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Olympia.) (Note: Riparian areas do not extend beyond
the toe of the slope on the landward side of existing dikes or levees unless specifically
exempt from federal vegetation management requirements.)
Once buffers are established, they shall not be altered except as allowed below. Riparian
buffers not currently meeting the minimum standards shall be restored; provided, that
such restoration does not conflict with other provisions of this chapter. In implementing
buffer widths other than the standard riparian buffers identified above, the director shall
provide opportunity for review and comment from appropriate federal, state or tribal
natural resource agencies to ensure the use of best available science. These comments
shall be included in the public record along with the basis and rationale for requirement or
approval of any such nonstandard buffers.
1. Increasing Buffer Widths. The city may increase the standard buffer widths on a case-
by-case basis, or to establish nonriparian buffer widths, when such buffers are
necessary to protect priority fish or wildlife (e.g., great blue heron nesting colonies,
osprey or cavity nesting ducks) using the HCA. This determination shall be supported
by appropriate documentation from the Departments of Ecology and Fish and
Wildlife, showing that the increased buffer width is reasonably related to the
protection of the fish and/or wildlife using the HCA.
2. Decreasing Buffer Widths. Decreasing standard buffers will be allowed only if the
applicant demonstrates that all of the following criteria are met:
a. A decrease is necessary to accomplish the purposes of the proposal and no
reasonable alternative is available; and
b. Decreasing width will not adversely affect the fish and wildlife habitat functions
and values; and
c. If a portion of a buffer is to be reduced, the remaining buffer area will be
enhanced, using native vegetation, artificial habitat features, vegetative
screening and/or barrier fencing as appropriate to improve the functional
attributes of the buffer and to provide equivalent or better protection for fish and
wildlife habitat functions and values; and
d. The buffer width shall not be reduced below 25 percent of the standard buffer
width unless no other feasible options exist and that no net loss of HCA riparian
functional values will result, based on a functional assessment provided by the
applicant utilizing a methodology approved by the city.
C. Allowed Uses in HCAs or Buffers.
1. Docks. Docks designed to facilitate low-impact uses, such as education and/or
private, noncommercial recreation may be permitted within fish and wildlife HCAs
under the following conditions:
a. The activity will have minimum adverse impact to the fish and wildlife habitat
conservation area;
b. The activity will not significantly degrade surface water or ground water;
c. The intrusion into the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area and its buffers
is fully mitigated; and
d. An opportunity for review and comment by federal, state and tribal natural
resource agencies shall be provided.
2. Limited park or recreational access to a fish and wildlife habitat area or its required
buffer; provided, that all of the following are satisfied:
a. The access is part of a public park or a recreational resort development that is
dependent on the access for its location and recreational function;
b. The access is limited to the minimum necessary to accomplish the recreational
function;
c. The access and the balance of the development is consistent with other
requirements of the Burlington Municipal Code and the Burlington shoreline
master program; and
d. The proponent obtains a written approval from the city council for the limited
access and associated mitigation.
3. Low impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of
the habitat buffer and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the
buffer depending on the sensitivity of the habitat involved; provided, that such
activity shall not result in a decrease in riparian functional values and shall not prevent
or inhibit the buffer's recovery to at least prealtered condition or function. Examples
of uses and activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases, as long as the
activity does not retard the overall recovery of the buffer, include removal of noxious
vegetation, pedestrian trails, viewing platforms, and stormwater dispersion outfalls
and bioswales.
§ 14.15.380 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.380
4. In the riparian buffer, removal of hazard trees that pose a threat to life, property, or
public safety as determined by a certified arborist may be permitted with prior written
approval. Any removed tree or vegetation shall be replaced with appropriate species.
In undeveloped buffer area downed trees and snags should be retained to improve
habitat conditions. Replacement shall be performed consistent with accepted
restoration standards for riparian areas within one calendar year. The community
development director may approve alternative tree species to promote fish and
wildlife habitat.
Prior to commencement of tree or vegetation removal and/or replacement, the
landowner must obtain written approval from the director.
D. Bald eagle habitats shall be protected pursuant to the Washington State Bald Eagle
Protection Rules (WAC 232-12-292); a cooperative habitat management plan shall be
developed in coordination with the Department of Fish and Wildlife whenever activities
that alter habitat are proposed near a verified nest territory or communal roost.
E. Wetlands that are identified as a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area shall be
protected according to the provisions in this title, referencing increasing buffer widths. If
the wetland buffer widths, standard buffer widths conflict with this section, the buffer
widths providing the greatest protection shall apply.
F. All other fish and wildlife habitat conservation area, including habitats/species of local
significance, shall be protected on a case-by-case basis by means of a habitat management
plan based on the PHS program, initial project review and site assessment/habitat
management plan.
G. Approval of any activity that can adversely affect fish and wildlife habitat conservation
areas shall conform to the requirements set forth in this title.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)
§ 14.15.390 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.390
Article VI
Frequently Flooded Areas

14.15.390 General.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to protect the ecological functions of floodplains and riparian areas by
managing, restricting, and regulating development in areas of the city designated as
floodplains and in other areas which are important to maintaining the ecological and
hydrologic functions of floodplains. Specifically, this section is intended to accomplish the
following objectives:
1. Protect human life, health and property from the dangers of flooding;
2. Minimize the need for publicly funded and hazardous rescue efforts to save those who
are isolated by floodwaters;
3. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood damage repair and flood
control projects;
4. Minimize disruption of commerce and governmental services;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in the floodplain;
6. Maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use of flood prone areas so as
to minimize future flood blight areas;
7. Encourage that those who occupy areas subject to flooding and channel migration
assume responsibility for their actions;
8. Ensure the city's residents and property owners can obtain flood insurance through
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program;
9. Maintain or improve the quality, availability, and ecological functions of rivers,
streams, lakes, wetlands, ground water, estuaries, and other water resources;
10. Retain the natural channel, shoreline, and floodplain creation processes and other
natural floodplain functions that protect, create, and maintain habitat for threatened
and endangered species;
11. Prevent or minimize loss of hydraulic, geomorphic, and ecological functions of
floodplains and stream channels.
B. Applicability. Except as explicitly exempt, this chapter shall apply to all development as
follows:
1. Floodplain Management Areas. This chapter shall apply to all areas mapped as or
meeting the definition of a floodplain management area.
2. Other Areas. For areas outside of, or not otherwise meeting the definition of, a
floodplain management area, all new buildings, and substantial improvements to
existing buildings, shall comply with the requirements of BMC § 14.15.430
(Construction standards).
§ 14.15.390 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.400
(Ord. 1903 § 2 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.400 Designation and mapping.
A. Designation. The following areas and features are designated as floodplain management
areas:
1. Flood hazard area. The flood hazard area, or floodplain, is the land subject to
inundation by the base flood. Flood hazard areas are designated on flood insurance
rate maps with the letters "A" or "V" including AE, AO, AH, A1-99, and VE.
2. Protected area. Includes lands that lie within the boundaries of a floodway, riparian
habitat zone, or channel migration area.
3. Riparian habitat zone. The water body, and adjacent land areas, likely to support
aquatic and riparian habitat. For purposes of administering this section, the riparian
habitat zone shall be any water body capable of being classified as a type "S," "F,"
"Np," or "Ns" water body, together with its associated riparian buffer, as described in
this chapter.
4. Floodway. Within the city of Burlington the floodway consists of the Skagit River
and all areas riverward of the toe of the dikes and levees along the Skagit River.
5. Chanel migration zone. Within the city of Burlington the channel zone shall be
limited to the Skagit River and all areas riverward of the toe of the dikes and levees
along the Skagit River.
6. Special flood risk zone. The special flood risk zone includes the following floodplain
areas:
a. Gages Slough, including wetlands and deep water habitat areas; or
b. Areas with a ground elevation three feet or more below the base flood elevation
that are hydraulically connected to Gages Slough through a channel,
watercourse, or other topographical feature that provides a continuous path
capable of conveying floodwaters with an elevation three feet or more below the
base flood elevation; or
c. Areas within 300 feet of the landward toe of dikes and levees along the Skagit
River, excluding floodways.
7. Other areas. Other areas may be designated as floodplain management areas if the
director determines, based on credible evidence, they are at equivalent risk of
flooding to mapped floodplain areas. In making such determinations the director shall
consider elevation, survey, or hydrologic data affecting the potential of the area for
flooding. Only information prepared by a licensed surveyor, or engineer, or otherwise
meeting the criteria for best available science in chapter365-195 WAC shall be
considered.
B. Mapping. The director shall be responsible for maintaining the city's floodplain maps and
data. The following maps, data sources, and procedures shall be used to identify floodplains
and floodplain management areas:
1. Valid, adopted, and up-to-date flood insurance rate maps (FIRM). Presently the
following maps provide information on the city of Burlington:
a. The flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for the city of Burlington dated January 3,
1985, and identified by community panel number 530153 0001 B;
b. The flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for Skagit County dated January 3, 1985,
and identified by community panel number 530151 0250 C;
c. The flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for Skagit County dated September 29,
1989, and identified by community panel number 530151 0235 D.
2. Any other valid, adopted, and up-to-date FIRM depicting areas within the city of
Burlington may be used for purposes of complying with this chapter.
3. The flood insurance study (FIS) for the city of Burlington, Washington, Skagit
County, dated July 3, 1984, and the flood insurance study for Skagit County,
Washington Unincorporated Areas dated September 29, 1989. In the event an updated
FIS depicting areas within the city of Burlington is adopted it may be used for
purposes of complying with this chapter.
4. The director shall make interpretations where needed as to the exact location and
boundaries of the floodplain management area and floodplain. Interpretations may be
necessary where there appears to be a conflict between the mapped location of the
floodplain management area or floodplain, and the actual field conditions based on
ground elevations or base flood elevations.
5. Any approved FEMA "letter of map amendment" or "letter of map revision."
6. The base flood elevation for floodplain areas within the city of Burlington delineated
as a "zone AH" or "zone AO" shall be the corresponding elevation (or depth)
identified on the applicable FIRM. Where base flood depths are not available for areas
identified as a "zone AO" the base flood elevation shall be considered to be two feet
above the highest grade adjacent to the structure.
7. The flood protection elevation (FPE) shall be determined as follows:
a. New structures and developments and substantial improvements to existing
structures or developments: base flood elevation plus one foot of additional
elevation;
b. New critical facilities and substantial improvements to existing structures or
developments: base flood elevation plus three feet of additional elevation.
8. The floodways shall be delineated as shown on the applicable FIRM. In all cases the
floodway shall, at a minimum, include the Skagit River and all areas riverward of the
toe of the dikes and levees along the Skagit River.
9. Where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been provided in floodplain
areas, the director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or, in the absence of
information from a federal or state agency, another relevant source provided such
information is consistent with the criteria for best available science in chapter365-195
§ 14.15.400 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.410
WAC.
C. New Regulatory Data and Map Revisions.
1. All requests to revise or change floodplain mapping or hazard data, including requests
for a letter of map revision and a conditional letter of map revision, shall be subject to
the following:
a. Community acknowledgment forms shall not be signed for requests based on
filling or other development, unless the filling or development was conducted in
full compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable
regulatory requirements;
b. Requests to revise or change a floodway delineation shall not be approved until
FEMA has issued a conditional letter of map revision approving the change.
2. Site-specific base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
involving more than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, if no applicable base flood
elevation data or mapping is available.
3. If areas are added to the city of Burlington through annexation that are adjacent to the
Skagit River, and if such areas do not meet the definition of a disconnected migration
area as defined in WAC 173-26-221(3)(b), the floodway associated such areas shall
include the Skagit River and one-half the mapped floodplain at any point.
4. All new hydrologic and hydraulic flood studies conducted pursuant to this section
shall consider future conditions and the cumulative effects from anticipated land use
changes in accordance with Regional Guidance for Hydrologic and Hydraulic Studies
in Support of the Model Ordinance for Floodplain Management under the National
Flood Insurance Program and the Endangered Species Act, FEMA Region 10, 2012.
5. In weighing conflicting official information sources regarding channel migration
zones, floodways, future flood conditions, and the location of riparian habitat areas,
the most restrictive data available at the time the decision is rendered shall be used.
D. All floodplain mapping, data, studies, regulations, and other information shall be
maintained by the community development director and shall be available during regular
city business hours, 833 South Spruce Street.
(Ord. 1903 § 2 (Exh. A), 2021)

14.15.410 Flood development permits.
A. Permit Required. Unless explicitly identified as exempt, a flood development permit shall
be required for all development in a floodplain management area. An exemption from
having to obtain a permit shall not be construed as an exemption from other applicable
requirements. All development in a floodplain management area shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter unless explicitly exempt.
B. Exempt Development. The following development shall not require a flood development
permit:
1. Routine maintenance of landscaping that does not involve grading, excavation, or
filling;
2. Removal of noxious weeds and hazard trees and replacement of non-native vegetation
with native vegetation;
3. Normal maintenance of structures, such as re-roofing and replacing siding, provided
such work does not qualify as a substantial improvement;
4. Normal maintenance of above-ground utilities and facilities, such as replacing
downed power lines and utility poles;
5. Normal street and road maintenance, including filling potholes, repaving, installing
signs and traffic and traffic lights, but not including the expansion of existing paved
areas;
6. Normal maintenance of a levee or other flood control facility prescribed in the
operations and maintenance plan for the levee or flood control facility are allowed in
the regulatory floodplain without need for a floodplain development permit. Normal
maintenance does not include repair from flood damage, expansion of the prism,
expansion of the face or toe or addition for protection on the face or toe with rock
armor;
7. Plowing and other normal farm practices (other than structures or filling) on farms in
the floodplain management areas and in existence as of the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter do not require a floodplain development permit.
Clearing additional land for agriculture after the date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter will require a flood plain development permit; and
8. The placement or storage of a recreational vehicle on a lot or site for less than 180
days provided:
a. Recreational vehicles shall be used only for travel and recreational purposes.
Recreational vehicles shall not be used as a dwelling unit or a place of
permanent habitation and shall under no circumstances be occupied for periods
of 30 days or more;
b. All recreational vehicles shall be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on
their wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions.
C. Application Requirements. Applications for flood development permits shall be made on
forms provided by the director and shall include all of the information required by the form
in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications including all of the
information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying
with this chapter and BMC Title 14A. A complete application shall, at a minimum, include:
1. One or more site plans, drawn to scale, showing:
a. The location, boundaries, dimensions, and elevations of the development site;
b. Names and location of all lakes, water bodies, watercourses, wetlands, rivers
and drainage facilities within 300 feet of the development site;
c. The elevations of the 10-, 50-, 100‑ , and 500-year floods, where the data are
available;
§ 14.15.410 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.410
d. The boundaries of the floodplain, special flood risk area, floodway, riparian
habitat zone, and channel migration area;
e. The proposed drainage system including, but not limited to, storm sewers,
overland flow paths, detention facilities, and roads;
f. Existing and proposed structures, fill, pavement and other impervious surfaces,
and sites for storage of materials;
g. All wetlands;
h. Designated fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, and habitat areas
identified for conservation or protection under state or federal or local laws or
regulations (e.g., Endangered Species Act, Magnuson-Stevens Fishery
Conservation and Management Act, Growth Management Act, Shorelines
Management Act, Priority Habitat and Species List);
i. Existing native vegetation, significant trees, and any proposed revegetation,
planting, or mitigation areas.
2. If the development involves grading, excavation, or filling, the site plan shall include
post-development elevation contours at one-foot intervals.
3. If the proposed development involves a new structure, substantial improvement to an
existing structure, or repairs to a substantially damaged structure that will be elevated,
the application shall include site elevation data and the following additional
elevations. All elevation data shall be provided in relation to mean sea level and shall
be prepared using the datum and methods prescribed by FEMA. Elevation data shall
be submitted on an approved elevation certificate form consistent with the
requirements of this chapter.
a. The top of bottom floor (including basement, crawlspace, or enclosure floor).
b. The lowest elevation of any machinery, equipment, mechanical equipment, or
HVAC systems servicing the structure.
4. If the proposed project includes a new structure, substantial improvement, or repairs
to a substantially damaged nonresidential structure that will be dry floodproofed, the
application shall include the FPE for the building site and the elevation to which the
structure will be dry floodproofed. A certification prepared by a registered
professional engineer or licensed architect shall be submitted and shall document that
the dry floodproofing methods employed are consistent with the floodproofing
criteria and requirements in this chapter.
5. The proposed project must be designed and located so that new structural flood
protection is not needed.
6. The application shall include a description of the extent to which a stream, lake,
watercourse, or other water body, including its shoreline, will be altered or relocated
as a result of the proposed development.
7. The application shall include documentation that the applicant will apply for all
necessary permits required by federal, state, or local law. The application shall
include written acknowledgment that the applicant understands that the final
inspection or certificate of occupancy will be issued only if the applicant provides
copies of the required federal, state, and local permits or letters stating that a permit is
not required. The floodplain permit is not valid if those other permits and approvals
are not obtained prior to any ground-disturbing work or structural improvements.
8. The application shall include acknowledgment by the applicant that representatives of
any federal, state or local unit of government with regulatory authority over the
project are authorized to enter upon the property to inspect the development.
9. Any other information requested by the director necessary to demonstrate compliance
with the requirements of this chapter, other Burlington Municipal Code requirements,
or any other applicable state or federal regulatory requirements.
D. Approval Criteria. Flood development permits shall be subject to the approval criteria and
development regulations identified in this section. The city shall have the authority to
condition floodplain permits in order to ensure full compliance with this section and to
ensure all development is reasonably safe from flooding. No permit shall be issued or
approved unless the proposal is consistent with the following requirements.
E. Review Process. Unless otherwise stated in this section, flood development permits shall
be processed in accordance with the review procedures prescribed in BMC Title 14A.
F. Appeals. Flood development permit decisions may be appealed in accordance with the
procedures prescribed in BMC Title 14A.
G. Time Limits. Flood development permits shall be subject to the following time limits:
1. Flood development permits associated with a building or grading permit shall be
subject to the time limit and expiration date applicable to the building or grading
permit.
2. Flood development permits associated with a land use permit or platting decision
shall be subject to the time limit and expiration date applicable to the land use permit
or platting decision.
3. For flood development permits not associated with another permit type, the
development authorized by the permit shall begin within 180 days and all
development shall be completed within two years.
(Ord. 1903 § 2 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.420 Development regulations.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all development in the
floodplain.
B. General Regulations.
1. All utilities providing services such as sanitary sewer, gas, electricity, and potable
water shall located, designed, and constructed to prevent or minimize flood damage;
2. New development requiring potable water shall be connected to a public water supply
system;
§ 14.15.420 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.420
3. Private water systems and wells shall not be used as a source of potable water for new
development. All wells within the floodplain management area shall be subject to the
following:
a. Wells shall be located outside the floodway; and
b. Wells and associated water system components shall be protected to the flood
protection elevation to prevent floodwaters from entering the well;
4. New development that generates, or has the potential to generate, wastewater shall be
connected to the municipal sewer system. New on-site waste disposal systems are
prohibited in the floodplain;
5. Development shall not create a threat to public health, safety, or negatively affect
water quality;
6. No construction, development, or substantial improvements shall be permitted if the
cumulative floodwater displacement effect of the proposed development, combined
with all other existing and proposed development, would cause the base flood
elevation to increase by more than one foot at any location in the city. A displacement
analysis, prepared by a licensed engineer, demonstrating compliance with this
provision shall be submitted for any construction, development, or substantial
improvement in flood zones A1-30 and AE.
C. Land Division. The following development regulations shall apply to all land divisions
including short plats, subdivisions, and binding site plans:
1. Land divisions shall employ site design, engineering, or construction practices to
minimize flood damage.
2. Applications for preliminary subdivision or binding site plan approval shall include a
habitat assessment and mitigation plan consistent with the requirements of this
chapter.
3. The layout and development density of proposed subdivisions and binding site plans
must be consistent with the restrictions and mitigation measures identified in the
habitat assessment and mitigation plan. The cluster development provisions identified
in BMC Titles 16 and 17 shall be used when necessary to mitigate impacts to
floodplain ecology and hydrology.
4. All final plats, short plats, and binding site plans shall include a note stating that the
plat contains property within a floodplain management area. Notes shall also be
included identifying any restrictions placed on the use or development of lots within
the plat or BSP.
5. Stormwater management and drainage systems shall be provided consistent with the
requirements of BMC Title 14 and shall incorporate LID measures in accordance with
the requirements of BMC Titles 16 and 17.
6. For land divisions involving five acres or more or the creation of 50 or more lots,
site-specific base flood elevation data shall be generated if base flood elevation data
for the development site is not available from an authorized source.
D. Riparian Habitat Zone. The following regulations shall apply to all development in a
riparian habitat zone or within 300 feet of a stream or river:
1. All development in the riparian habitat zone shall comply with the standards and
regulations set forth in this chapter for fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.
2. The site plan shall depict the location of the stream or river and the extent of the
associated riparian buffer.
E. Site Design. The following site design regulations shall apply to all development on
existing lots:
1. Structures and other development shall be located to avoid flood damage.
2. If a lot has a buildable area outside of the floodplain management area, all new
structures shall be located in that area to the maximum extent possible.
3. If a lot does not have a buildable area outside of the regulatory floodplain, all new
structures, pavement, and other development must be sited in the location that has the
least impact on habitat by locating the structures as far from the water body as
possible or placing the structures on the highest land on the lot.
4. A minimum setback of 15 feet from the protected area shall be required for all
structures.
5. Unless the development is explicitly exempt from habitat assessment and mitigation
requirements a habitat impact assessment, and if necessary a mitigation plan, shall be
prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
6. All new development shall be designed and located to minimize the impact on flood
flows, flood storage, water quality, and habitat.
7. Stormwater and drainage features shall incorporate low impact development
techniques in accordance with the requirements of BMC Title 17.
8. If the development will create new impervious surfaces so that more than 10 percent
of the portion of the lot in the regulatory floodplain is covered by impervious surface,
the applicant shall demonstrate that there will be no net increase in the rate and
volume of the stormwater surface runoff that leaves the site or that the adverse impact
is mitigated, as required by this chapter.
9. The site plan shall account for surface drainage to ensure that:
a. Existing and new buildings on the site will be protected from stormwater runoff;
and
b. The project will not divert or increase surface water runoff onto neighboring
properties.
F. Hazardous Materials. These regulations shall apply to all development involving the
storage, handling, disposal, processing, or production of hazardous materials.
G. Critical Facilities.
1. New critical facilities shall not be located in a floodplain management area unless:
§ 14.15.420 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.420
a. No feasible site exists outside the floodplain management area; or
b. The critical facility is necessary to provide flood protection or drainage services.
2. If no feasible site exists outside the floodplain management area, than critical
facilities may be established within the floodplain management area subject to the
following:
a. Critical facilities shall have the lowest floor elevated four feet above the base
flood elevation or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. If no
applicable 500-year flood data exists, information shall be developed by a
qualified professional in accordance with FEMA mapping guidelines and
included with the permit application.
b. Access to and from the critical facility shall be protected to the elevation of the
500-year flood to the extent feasible.
H. Floodway Development. The following regulations shall apply to all development in the
floodway:
1. All development shall be prohibited in the floodway except as follows:
a. Utility outfall structures authorized by the Corps of Engineers; and
b. The construction and maintenance of dikes and levees for flood control
purposes; and
c. Bridges and other river crossings for transportation or utility purposes as
minimally necessary for purposes of permitting an essential public facility; and
d. Development which is explicitly exempt from floodplain development permit
requirements by BMC § 14.15.410.
2. The following information shall be included with any application for a permit for
development in the floodway. All information shall be prepared by a licensed
engineer.
a. A thorough hydraulic and hydrologic analysis prepared by a licensed engineer,
in accordance with standard engineering practices, that the proposed
development will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence
of the base flood discharge; and
b. A projection of anticipated changes to hydraulic and hydrologic conditions over
the life of development. The required analysis shall be based on the best
available science and shall address changes attributable to climate change and
projected floodplain development. For the purpose of interpreting these
requirements the term "life of the development" shall mean a period of at least
100 years;
c. An analysis of any impacts to flood protection structures such as dikes, levees,
and outfalls;
d. An analysis of potential upstream and downstream flooding impacts;
e. Plans prepared by a licensed engineer for the structure or development in
accordance with the hydraulic and hydrologic analysis required above;
f. Any other information requested by the director in order to demonstrate
compliance with this chapter and ensure the development is reasonably safe
from flooding.
3. Approval Criteria. Floodway development shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. In addition, above-ground
structures in the floodway shall be subject to the following:
a. The lowest horizontal element shall be three feet or more above the base flood
elevation or the base flood elevation projected for the life of the development,
whichever is greater;
b. The development shall not compromise flood protection improvements such as
dikes and levees;
c. The structure shall allow for the unimpeded passage of floodwater and debris
flows;
d. The structure shall be designed and constructed to minimize the number of
vertical supports and fill placed in the floodway.
I. Alteration of Watercourses. Developments involving the alteration or relocation of a
watercourse shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. The following documentation shall be provided with the flood development permit
application:
a. A letter from FEMA stating that the proposed development does not require a
conditional letter of map amendment; or
b. An approved conditional letter of map amendment.
2. If an approved conditional letter of map amendment is provided, any conditions,
restrictions, or mitigation measures identified in the letter shall be included as
conditions in the approved flood development permit.
3. Notification shall be provided to adjacent communities, the Washington State
Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Washington State Department of Natural
Resources, and the Washington State Department of Ecology prior to approving
development, and shall submit evidence of such notification to FEMA.
4. Maintenance shall be provided within the portion of the watercourse that is altered or
relocated so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. If the maintenance
program does not call for cutting of native vegetation, the system shall be oversized
at the time of construction to compensate for vegetation growth or any other natural
factors that may necessitate future maintenance.
J. Development in the Special Flood Risk Zone. Development in the special flood risk zone
shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. Development other than the following is prohibited in the special flood risk zone;
§ 14.15.420 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.420
provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing construction or
fill in wetlands:
a. Minor structures and additions for which a building permit is not required and
which create no new residences;
b. Minor fills and excavations of less than 12 cubic yards or which will not raise
the level of land above that of the surrounding area;
c. Normal maintenance, resurfacing and rebuilding at comparable grade of
bridges, streets and access ways;
d. Underground improvements;
e. Maintenance, repair, alteration and like replacement of existing improvements;
f. Other minor development which causes no significant impoundment or
displacement of floodwaters, such as signs and small unenclosed structures;
g. Elevated structures which allow floodwaters to flow underneath and which meet
the following criteria:
i. All structures shall be elevated so that the lowest supporting member is
located no lower than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation, with all
space below the lowest supporting member open so as not to impede the
flow of water, except for breakaway walls as provided below.
ii. Solid walls are prohibited below the base flood elevation to keep the area
free of obstruction unless they are designed to break away. A breakaway
wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no
more than 20 pounds per square foot.
iii. All structures shall be securely anchored on piling, columns, or foundation
walls oriented to the axis of the flow path. Said support elements shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as capable of
withstanding all applied loads of the 100-year flood flow.
iv. There shall be no fill used for structural support.
2. Regardless of method of construction, operation, development, substantial
improvement, or expansion of residential health care facilities is prohibited in the
special flood risk zone.
3. New multifamily residential structures are prohibited in the special flood risk zone.
4. Land divisions, including short plats, subdivisions, and binding site plans, shall be
subject to the following:
a. No lot shall be created through a subdivision or short subdivision which lacks
an adequate building site outside the floodway or special flood risk area, unless
restrictive notes are included on the face of the plat permanently prohibiting
development of the lot, or restricting the use of the lot to flood control structures
and improvements; and
b. Land within a floodway or special flood risk zone shall be placed within a
separate tract or easement if required by BMC § 14.15.200(B) and BMC Title
16.
5. New structures shall not be located within a special flood risk zone but yards and
other nonstructural improvements that fully comply with all other applicable
requirements identified in this chapter may extend into a special flood risk zone.
6. New structures shall be located so that the proposed project will not affect the
hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and must be certified by
a registered professional engineer.
7. Proposed structures with an estimated value greater than $250,000 shall be subject to
the following:
a. The proposed structure shall not have a significant adverse impact on flood
hazards; and
b. There are no other physically feasible alternatives available.
8. Development for which a floodplain permit is required shall not be permitted
riverward of a dike or levee or within 100 feet of the landward toe of a dike or levee
except as follows:
a. Improvements to dikes, levees, and flood control improvements; and
b. Interim uses involving no fill, asphalt, stockpiling of material, or permanent
structures; and
c. Utility outfall structures authorized by the Corps of Engineers; and
d. The construction and maintenance of dikes and levees for flood control
purposes; and
e. Bridges and other river crossings for transportation or utility purposes as
minimally necessary for purposes of permitting an essential public facility.
f. Prior to authorizing any development riverward of a dike or levee or within 100
feet of the landward toe of a dike or levee the city shall consult with the dike
district and shall incorporate conditions as necessary to protect the structural
integrity of dikes, levees, and other flood control improvements and as
necessary to permit emergency flood fighting efforts.
(Ord. 1903 § 2 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.430 Construction standards.
A. General. The following development activities shall be subject to the floodplain
construction standards in this section:
1. Construction or placement of a new structure;
2. Reconstruction, rehabilitation, or other improvements the meet the definition of a
"substantial improvement";
§ 14.15.430 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.430
3. Repairs to an existing building that has been substantially damaged;
4. Placing a manufactured home on a lot or site;
5. Placing a recreational vehicle or travel trailer on a lot or site for more than 180 days;
6. Additions to existing structures.
B. Residential Construction.
1. All new structures, additions, and substantial improvements shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated at or above the FPE.
2. The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure.
3. All materials below the FPE shall be resistant to flood damage and firmly anchored
to prevent flotation. Materials harmful to aquatic wildlife, such as creosote, are
prohibited below the FPE.
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, duct work, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment
and other service facilities shall be elevated above the FPE. Water, sewage, electrical,
and other utility lines below the FPE shall be constructed so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within them during conditions of flooding.
5. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding, including
garages attached to residential structures where the floor slab is below the base flood
elevation, shall be used only for parking, storage, or building access and shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement
shall either be certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed architect and/
or meet or exceed the criteria below:
a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices;
provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
6. In zones V, V1-30 and VE, new structures and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on pilings or columns so that:
a. The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated above the FPE.
b. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and
water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water
loading values shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence interval).
c. The areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be free of
obstruction.
d. The structure or improvement shall be located landward of the reach of mean
high tide.
e. The use of fill for structural support of a structure or addition is prohibited.
f. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the
structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify
that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting these provisions.
C. Nonresidential Construction.
1. The structure shall not located in zones V, V1-30, or VE;
2. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or
other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated at or above the flood protection elevation, or the elevation required by ASCE
24, whichever is greater. Mechanical equipment and utilities shall be waterproofed or
be installed at or above the flood protection elevation or the elevation required by
ASCE 24, whichever is greater;
3. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be used
only for parking, storage, or building access and shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or licensed architect and/or meet or exceed the
criteria below:
a. A minimum of two openings with a total net area of at least one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices;
provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters;
4. As an alternative to the elevation and venting requirements identified in subsections
(C)(2) and (3) of this section, new construction and substantial improvements may be
dry floodproofed in accordance with the following standards:
a. All portions of the structure below the flood protection elevation, or the
elevation required by ASCE 24, whichever is greater, shall be dry floodproofed
with watertight walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
b. The structural components shall be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
c. A registered professional engineer or licensed architect shall stamp the building
plans and certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection
based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications
and plans; and
§ 14.15.430 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.430
d. A permit condition shall be included notifying the permit applicant that flood
insurance premiums be determined based on an elevation that is one foot below
the floodproofed elevation. For example, if the dry floodproofed elevation is one
foot above the base flood elevation, flood insurance rates will be assessed as if
the building is located at the base flood elevation; and
5. Mechanical equipment, HVAC systems, and utilities shall either be installed at or
above the flood protection elevation, waterproofed, or located in an area that has been
dry floodproofed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
D. Manufactured Homes. The placement of manufactured homes on a site or lot, substantial
improvements to existing manufactured homes shall be subject to the following
regulations:
1. A permanent foundation shall be provided; and
2. The foundation shall be elevated in accordance with the requirements of this section;
and
3. The manufactured home shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to other applicable anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
4. Only manufactured homes meeting the definition of a "manufactured home" in BMC
Title 17 shall be used as a dwelling unit or a place of permanent habitation.
Recreational vehicles shall not be used as a dwelling unit or a place of permanent
habitation.
E. Crawlspaces. Buildings utilizing crawlspace construction, where any portion of the
crawlspace is below the grade on all sides, shall meet the following requirements:
1. Crawlspace construction is not permitted in the V zones;
2. Crawlspace construction is not permitted in zones AO and A1-A30 where floodwater
velocities could exceed five feet per second, unless it can be shown through an
engineering analysis that the structural components will resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
3. The interior grade of the crawlspace shall not be more than two feet below the lowest
adjacent grade;
4. The height of the crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to
the top of the foundation wall, shall not exceed four feet at any point and the height,
measured from the crawlspace grade to the top of the next highest floor, shall not
exceed five feet at any point;
5. An adequate drainage system shall be provided to remove floodwaters from the
crawlspace in a reasonable amount of time after a flood event.
F. Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall comply with all of the requirements in this
section, except that accessory structures shall be exempt from elevation requirements
provided they are:
1. Used only for parking or storage; and
2. Constructed and placed on the site or lot so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters; and
3. Anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures; and
4. Constructed of flood-resistant materials below the flood protection elevation.
G. Certificate of Occupancy. No final inspection or occupancy shall be approved unless all of
the following requirements have been met:
1. An elevation or floodproofing certificate, consistent with the requirements of this
chapter, shall be submitted;
2. For projects subject to floodplain habitat mitigation plan requirements, all of the
required mitigation activities and work identified in the mitigation plan shall be
completed and inspected;
3. Copies of all other required federal, state, and local permits shall be submitted;
4. The project fully complies with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1903 § 2 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

14.15.431 Habitat impacts and mitigation.
A. Applicability. A habitat assessment, and if necessary a mitigation plan, shall be provided
with all applications for a flood development permit unless the development activity is
explicitly identified as being exempt below.
B. Exempt Development. The following development activities shall be exempt from the
habitat assessment and mitigation requirements of this section:
1. Repairing or remodeling an existing structure provided the work does not constitute a
substantial improvement or a repair to substantial damage.
2. Additions to existing structures provided the addition or expansion does not increase
the footprint of the structure by more than 10 percent, or constitute a substantial
improvement. For purposes of determining compliance with this requirement,
measurements shall be counted cumulatively from the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter or September 22, 2011, whichever is earlier. If the structure is
in the floodway, there shall be no change in the dimensions perpendicular to flow.
3. Development undertaken for the sole purpose of creating, restoring or enhancing the
natural functions of floodplains, streams, watercourses, fish and wildlife habitat, and
riparian areas; provided, that:
a. The project complies with all other applicable federal, state, and local permit
requirements and regulations;
b. The development activities do not include the placement of fill or the creation
§ 14.15.431 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.431
of additional impervious surface areas.
4. Development of open space and recreational facilities, such as parks, trails, and play
fields, that do not include structures, fill, impervious surfaces or the removal of more
than five percent of the native vegetation within the floodplain management area.
5. Other development activities consistent with all of the following:
a. Native vegetation within the riparian habitat zone shall not be removed; and
b. Native vegetation removal outside of the riparian habitat zone does not exceed
35 percent of the surface area of the portion of the site within the floodplain
management area. If the site contains a riparian habitat zone, the vegetation
within the riparian habitat zone may be counted towards this requirement; and
c. The development does not involve the storage, handling, processing, disposal,
transport, or production of significant quantities of chemicals, explosives,
gasoline, propane, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other materials that are hazardous, toxic, or a threat to
water quality; and
d. The development is not riverward of a dike or levee; and
e. The development does not reduce the effective flood storage volume of the
floodplain management area, or the development provides compensatory
storage consistent with all of the following:
i. The compensatory storage is provided at an equivalent volume and at
equivalent elevations to the flood storage capacity being displaced. For
purposes of interpreting this requirement "equivalent elevation" shall mean
an elevation with a similar relationship to the ordinary high water and the
best available 15-, 50-, and 100-year flood surface water profiles; and
ii. The compensatory storage is hydraulically connected to the source of
flooding; and
iii. Flood development permit applications for projects involving
compensatory mitigation shall include grading plans and calculations
prepared by a licensed engineer demonstrating compliance with the
compensatory mitigation requirements.
C. Habitat Impact Assessment. Unless the proposal involves development activities explicitly
identified above as exempt, all flood development permit applications shall include a
habitat assessment prepared consistent with the requirements of this section.
1. Requirements. All habitat assessments shall include the following information,
analysis, and materials:
a. A biological evaluation or biological assessment developed per 50 CFR 402.12
to initiate federal interagency consultation under Endangered Species Act
Section 7(a)(2); or
b. Documentation that the activity fits within Section 4(d) of the Endangered
Species Act; or
c. Documentation that the activity fits within a habitat conservation plan approved
pursuant to Section 10 of the Endangered Species Act, where any such
assessment has been prepared or is otherwise made available; or
d. An assessment prepared in accordance with Regional Guidance for Floodplain
Habitat Assessment and Mitigation, FEMA Region 10, 2010. The assessment
shall determine if the project would adversely affect:
i. Species that are federal, state or local listed as threatened or endangered;
ii. The primary constituent elements for critical habitat, when designated;
iii. Essential fish habitat designated by the National Marine Fisheries Service;
iv. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;
v. Other protected areas and elements necessary for species conservation.
D. Habitat Mitigation Plan. If the habitat assessment provided with the flood development
permit application concludes the development is expected to have an adverse effect on
water quality, aquatic or riparian habitat, or habitat functions, the applicant shall provide a
habitat mitigation plan. The following requirements shall apply to habitat mitigation plans
and to all developments requiring a habitat mitigation plan:
1. Habitat mitigation plans shall be prepared in accordance with standards and
procedures identified in the "Regional Guidance for Floodplain Habitat Assessment
and Mitigation" published by FEMA Region 10.
2. If the project is located outside the protected area, the mitigation plan shall include
such avoidance, minimization, restoration, or compensation measures so that indirect
adverse effects of development in the floodplain (effects to stormwater, riparian
vegetation, bank stability, channel migration, hyporheic zones, wetlands, large woody
debris, etc.) are mitigated such that equivalent or better habitat protection is provided.
3. New stream crossings are not allowed outside the protected area unless the crossing
has been explicitly approved consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
4. For development within the protected area, the mitigation plan shall stipulate
avoidance measures as are needed to ensure that there is no adverse effect during any
phase of the project.
5. The plan's habitat mitigation activities shall be incorporated into the design of
development. The floodplain development permit shall be based on the redesigned
project and its mitigation components.
6. If the NMFS or USFWS issues an incidental take permit under Section 10 ESA,
Biological Opinion under Section 7, ESA; it can be then it can be used as a mitigation
plan to meet the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 1903 § 2 (Exh. A), 2021)

14.15.432 Records and documentation.
Certificates, forms, studies, and other documents required by this chapter shall be consistent with
the following requirements and shall be maintained by the city and made available for public
§ 14.15.432 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.433
review:
A. The finished construction elevations required by this chapter shall be recorded on a current
FEMA elevation certificate. All elevation certificates shall be prepared, stamped, and
signed by a professional land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington.
B. Base flood elevation data, in relationship to the datum of the effective FIRM, shall be
recorded on a current FEMA floodproofing certificate. All floodproofing certificates shall
be prepared, stamped, and signed by a professional engineer licensed in the state of
Washington.
C. Flood development permits, documents included with flood development permit
applications, elevation certificates, floodproofing certificates, and certificates of occupancy
shall be maintained by the city and shall be available for public review.
D. Maps, studies, reports and other sources of information used in the administration of this
section shall be maintained by the director and shall be available for public review.
E. The city shall maintain, and make available for public review, any other documents or
studies required by this chapter including, but not limited to, floodplain habitat
assessments, improvement and damage calculations, inspection records, approved permits,
and completed application forms.
(Ord. 1903 § 2 (Exh. A), 2021)

14.15.433 Penalties and enforcement.
Failure to obtain a flood development permit or any other violation of any of the regulations
identified in this section shall be subject to the penalty and enforcement provisions identified in
chapter 1.34 BMC and any other applicable enforcement provisions authorized by Burlington
Municipal Code.
(Ord. 1903 § 2 (Exh. A), 2021)
§ 14.15.436 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.436
Article VII
Special Management Areas

14.15.436 Special management area regulations.
A. Application. The standards in this section shall apply to development in the special
management areas. The standards in this section are not intended to apply to residential
landscaping or other minor construction activities within the boundaries of a legally
existing residential home site.
B. Purpose. Special management areas have been designated to manage development in
specific geographic areas. The special management areas designated in this chapter are
characterized by unique features, locally important habitat values, or the presences of
severe natural hazard risks. Special management areas may also include areas with
multiple, overlapping, or widespread critical areas and natural hazards.
C. Designation. The following special management areas have been designated by this
chapter:
1. Burlington Hill;
2. Gages Slough;
3. Skagit River Corridor.
D. Development Standards. Development in special management areas shall be consistent
with the applicable policies in the Burlington comprehensive plan (Special Management
Areas, section 4.5).
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)
§ 14.15.440 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 14.15.480
Article VIII
Compliance

14.15.440 Compliance with critical area regulations.
No permit for a development proposal shall be issued unless it also complies with the regulations
of this chapter.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.450 Construction.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter conflict with the provisions of the underlying
zoning, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.460 Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any
clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this chapter, or the invalidity
of the application thereof to any person, owner, or circumstance shall not affect the validity
of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons, owners or
circumstances.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.470 State Environmental Policy Act.
This chapter establishes minimum standards which are to be applied to specific land use and
platting actions in order to prevent further degradation of critical areas in the city, and is not
intended to limit the application of the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA). Projects subject
to SEPA shall be reviewed and may also be conditioned or denied.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

14.15.480 Liability disclaimer.
Since floods more severe than the 100-year flood occur on rare occasions, reliance on this
chapter will not altogether guarantee freedom from flood damage, nor shall this chapter create
liability on the part of the city for such damage. It is further noted that other data regarding
100-year floodplain elevations may exist which indicate a more severe threat than the data
established by FEMA. Information on these other data sources shall be kept and made available
at Burlington City Hall.
(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)
LAND USE DECISIONS
Title 14A
LAND USE DECISIONS
Chapter 14A.01 § 14A.05.110. Public hearing
GENERAL PROVISIONS requirements.