15.01.010 Title.
This title shall be known as "Buildings and Construction." This chapter shall be called "General
Provisions."
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

15.01.020 Application.
This title shall be applicable as is set forth in the following chapters.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

15.01.030 Purpose.
The purpose of this title is as follows:
A. Identify the international, uniform, and fire codes adopted by the city;
B. Establish regulations for the construction, maintenance, and operation of buildings and
structures;
C. Establish a uniform system of addressing and ensure coordination with regional emergency
response communication and dispatch systems;
D. Establish provisions for the collection and assessment of transportation, park, and fire
impact fees;
E. Ensure buildings and structures provide environments that are safe, healthy, accessible, and
energy efficient;
F. Facilitate emergency response services;
G. Implement and enforce the provisions of the Washington State Building Code, Title 51
WAC, and chapters 19.27, 19.27A, and 70.92 RCW;
H. Implement the Burlington comprehensive plan and the requirements of chapter36.70A
RCW.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

15.01.040 Authority.
The provisions of this title are authorized pursuant to chapters19.27 and 36.70A RCW, RCW
82.02.050 through 82.02.090 and other applicable laws and regulations as well as the authority
identified in the chapters contained within this title.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

15.01.050 Adoption by reference.
Statutes, codes or regulations identified or adopted herein shall be the existing version of that
statute, code or regulation and any subsequent amendment to the same, unless expressly stated
otherwise.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

15.01.060 Definitions.
The words listed in this title shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise. Terms relating to pollutants and to hazardous wastes, materials, and
substances, where not defined in this title, shall be as defined in chapters 173-303 and 173-340
WAC, the International Building Code or Fire Code. Words used in the singular include the
plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. For the purpose of reviewing permit
applications or conducting plan review or inspections under the uniform codes adopted by
chapter 15.04 BMC the definitions in the applicable uniform codes shall control in the event of
a conflict with this section.
"A"
"Act" means the Growth Management Act, as codified in chapter 36.70A RCW, as now in
existence or as hereafter amended.
"B"
"Boundary line adjustment" or "lot boundary adjustment" shall have the same meaning as set
forth in BMC Title 16.
"Building official" means the building official who is responsible for the enforcement of the
building code, residential code, mechanical code, fuel gas code, plumbing code, energy
conservation code, housing code, abatement of dangerous buildings code, all special hazards
codes which may now or hereafter be adopted, of the city. Building official shall also be known
as a department head.
"Building permit" or "construction permit" means an official document or certification issued
under the city's adopted uniform codes which authorizes the construction, alteration,
enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition,
moving or repair of a building or structure.
"Burlington Hill special management area" means those portions of Burlington Hill with a
ground elevation 40 feet or more above sea level as shown on the most current USGS 7.5 minute
topographic quadrangle map.
"C"
"Capital facilities" means streets, roads, highways, sidewalks, street and road lighting systems,
traffic signals, domestic water systems, storm and sanitary sewer systems, parks and recreational
facilities, and schools. "Capital facilities" also means any buildings, structures, equipment, and
physical improvements necessary to provide public services.
"Capital facilities plan" means the capital facilities element of the city's comprehensive plan. The
capital facilities plan (CFP) is a general plan for providing the facilities and services necessary
to serve the projected population and employment growth identified in the land use element of
the comprehensive plan and is used as the basis for the development, and annual revision of, the
capital improvement plan (CIP).
"Capital improvement plan" (CIP) means the detailed six-year financing plan required by WAC
365-196-415(1)(d). The capital improvement plan is a component of the comprehensive plan and
is revised and updated annually as a means to address changing budgetary conditions and is used
to implement the capital facilities plan.
§ 15.01.060 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION § 15.01.060
"Certificate of occupancy" means a written document issued by the city in accordance with the
provisions of the building permit. The certificate of occupancy indicates that the project has
been inspected for compliance with applicable uniform and development code requirements.
The certificate of occupancy gives permission to use or occupy the premises for the approved
proposed use.
"City" means the city of Burlington.
"City administrator" means the duly appointed city administrator or his/her designee under the
authority of the mayor.
"City engineer" or "public works director" means the official appointed and acting as the public
works director for the city.
"Community development director" means the official appointed and acting as the community
development director.
"Council" means the city council of the city of Burlington.
"County" means Skagit County.
"D"
"Developer" means an individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation, state agency,
or other person undertaking development activity, and their successors and assigns.
Development or Development Activity. "Development" means any activity that results in a use
or modification of land or its resources. Development activities include, but are not limited to:
dredging, drilling, dumping, filling, earth movement, grading, clearing or removal of vegetation;
storage of materials or equipment; building or construction; the placement of manufactured
homes; land division, boundary line adjustments, lot segregations, subdivisions and short
subdivisions; binding site plans; land use permit approvals; variances; shoreline development
or substantial development; and activities or uses allowed through conditional use permits; or
any change in use of land that creates additional demand and need for public streets and roads,
publicly owned parks, open space and recreational facilities, and fire protection facilities.
"Development approval" means any written authorization from the city, other than a building
permit, which authorizes the commencement of a development activity, including, but not
limited to, plat approval, binding site plan approval, boundary line adjustment, and a conditional
use permit.
"Director" means the community development director.
"Dwelling unit" means a building, or a portion of a building, providing complete housekeeping
facilities for one family or housekeeping unit. Dwellings are differentiated from transient
accommodations by providing a permanent, nontransient residence or place of habitation.
"E"
"Encumbered" means to reserve, set aside, or otherwise earmark the impact fees in order to pay
for commitments, contractual obligations, or other liabilities incurred for public facilities.
"F"
"Family" means a person, or two or more persons, related by blood or marriage or law living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling. In addition, the following shall be
included in the definition of "family" pursuant to the requirements of state and/or federal law:
1. Adult family homes licensed pursuant to RCW 70.128.150;
2. Foster homes for the placement of the disabled, or expectant mothers in a residential
setting including, but not limited to, foster family homes licensed pursuant to chapter 74.15
RCW, community group care facilities licensed pursuant to chapter 74.15 RCW and crisis
residential centers pursuant to chapter 13.32A RCW;
3. Consensual living arrangements of the disabled protected pursuant to the Federal Fair
Housing Act amendments; and
4. A housekeeping unit as defined by chapter 17.01 BMC.
"Feepayer" is a person, corporation, partnership, an incorporated association, or any other
similar entity, or department or bureau of any governmental entity or municipal corporation,
commencing a development activity which creates the demand for planned facilities, and which
requires development approval and/or the issuance of a building permit. "Feepayer" includes an
applicant for an impact fee credit.
"Fire impact fee" means the impact fee designated to pay for a proportionate portion of fire
protection facilities identified in the capital improvement plan.
"Fire marshal" or "fire code official" means the official responsible for enforcing and
administering the city's adopted fire code, fire safety requirements, and other related codes and
requirements.
"G"
"Grading permit" means a permit authorizing the clearing, grading, fill, excavation, or the
construction of site improvements or infrastructure such as utilities, streets, and stormwater
infrastructure. Grading permits are processed as a type of building permit but are subject to an
additional level of review for compliance with the requirements of BMC Titles 12, 13, and 14.
"H"
"Hearing examiner" means the official designated under the provisions of chapter 17.120 BMC.
"I"
"Impact fee" means a payment of money imposed by the city on development activities pursuant
to this chapter as a condition of granting development approval and/or a building permit in
order to pay for the planned facilities needed to serve new growth and development activity.
"Impact fee" does not include a reasonable permit fee, an application fee, the administrative fee
for collecting and handling impact fees, the cost of reviewing independent fee calculations, or
the administrative fee required for an appeal pursuant to this chapter.
"Impact fee account" or "account" means the account or accounts established for the planned
facilities for which impact fees are collected. The accounts shall be established pursuant to this
chapter, and comply with the requirements of RCW 82.02.070.
"Independent fee calculation" means the impact calculation and/or economic documentation
prepared by the feepayer to support the assessment of an impact fee other than by the use of the
impact fees adopted herein and on file in the office of the finance director, or the calculations
prepared by the public works director/city engineer in the case of traffic impact fees, the parks
and recreation director in the case of park impact fees and/or the fire chief in the case of fire
impact fees, where none of the impact fee categories or impact fee amounts in this chapter
accurately describe or capture the impacts of the development activity on public streets and
§ 15.01.060 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION § 15.01.060
roads, publicly owned parks, open space and recreational facilities, and fire protection facilities.
All independent fee calculations shall be prepared by the respective department director(s)
as specified above, and shall be submitted to the city administrator/community development
director for review and recommendation to city council for final determination.
"Interest" means the average interest rate earned by the city of Burlington in the last fiscal year,
if not otherwise defined.
"L"
"Land use permit" is a consolidated development approval or permit issued pursuant to BMC
Title 14A.
"Legally existing" or "legally established" means a use or structure which was established
in compliance with all applicable rules, regulations, and laws in effect at the time of its
establishment, including the requirement to obtain permits, authorizations, or approvals.
"Level of service (LOS)" means the quantity and quality of service which the city council has
determined to be appropriate and desirable for the city. A measure of the LOS may include,
but is in no way limited to, maximum levels of congestion on city streets and roads, maximum
commute times, maximum wait at stops, maximum fire department response time, minimum
fire suppression capabilities, minimum park space per capita for a variety of types of parks,
minimum distance from residences to parks, and any other factors the city council may deem
appropriate.
"M"
"Manufactured home" means a single-family dwelling built in accordance with regulations
adopted under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.) and RCW 43.22.335. This term includes modular homes as
defined in this chapter but does not include mobile homes. This term also does not include
recreational vehicles, park models, trailers, and other similar vehicles which are licensed for use
on public roads, capable of being licensed for use on public roads, or designed and constructed
to be licensed for use on public roads. Only structures which are certified by the state of
Washington or federal government for use as a permanent habitable dwelling are included in this
definition.
"Manufactured home park" or "mobile home park" means an area of land occupied or designed
for the occupancy of two or more manufactured homes.
"Mobile home" means a factory built dwelling unit that does not meet current state or federal
standards for factory built dwellings, modular homes, or manufactured homes. This definition
does not include manufactured or modular homes as defined in this chapter or site built homes
constructed in accordance with city building code requirements.
"Modular home" means factory built housing as defined by RCW 43.22.450(3) which has been
approved by the Department of Labor and Industries in accordance with RCW 43.22.455.
"O"
"Owner" means the owner of record of real property or a person with an unrestricted written
option to purchase property; provided, that if the real property is being purchased under a
recorded real estate contract, the purchaser shall be considered the owner of the real property.
"P"
"Parks director" means the parks and recreation director of the city parks and recreation
department, also referred to herein as a department head.
"Parks impact fee" means the impact fee designated to pay for publicly owned parks, open space
and recreation capital facilities, projects and equipment listed within the capital facilities element
of the comprehensive plan (adopted annually by resolution of city council in the form of the six-
year CIP).
"Peak p.m. hour" means the consecutive 60-minute periods during the 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
peak period during which the highest volume of trips on the city's street system occurs.
"Planned facilities" shall mean public streets, roads and associated transportation equipment,
facilities and infrastructure, publicly owned parks, open space, parks and recreation equipment
and facilities, and fire protection equipment and facilities included in the capital facilities
element of the comprehensive plan, capital facility plan, and/or six-year capital improvement
plan (CIP) for Burlington.
"Project improvements" means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to
provide service for a particular development project or users of the project, that are necessary
for the use and convenience of the occupant or users of the project, and are not listed in the
capital facilities plan or capital facilities element of the comprehensive plan (six-year city capital
improvement plan (CIP)) adopted by resolution of the city council annually and used in the fee
calculation.
"Public services" means fire protection and suppression, law enforcement, public health,
education, recreation, environmental protection, and other governmental services.
"R"
"Residential structure" means a house, apartment, mobile home, manufactured home or modular
home containing one or more dwelling units.
"S"
"Square footage" means the square feet of the gross floor area of a development or structure.
"State" means the state of Washington.
"System improvements" means planned facilities that are designed to provide service to the
community at large, in contrast to project improvements. In the instance of transportation
impact fees, "system improvements" are those public facilities that are included in the city of
Burlington's capital facilities plan or capital improvement plan, and form the basis of calculating
the city's traffic/transportation impact fees.
"T"
"Traffic/transportation impact fees" means the impact fee designated to pay for public streets
and roads, capital facilities and equipment identified in the city's capital facilities plan or capital
improvement plan.
"Transient accommodations" means the provision of lodging units, room, board, or sleeping
space to guests on a short-term basis for periods of less than 30 days. This term does not include
multifamily dwellings or boarding houses as defined in BMC Title 17.
"U"
"Uniform codes" means the codes adopted by reference under chapter 15.04 BMC.
"V"
§ 15.01.060 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION § 15.01.070
"Voluntary agreement" means an agreement between the developer and the city or as authorized
by RCW 82.02.020.
"W"
"Way-of-travel" means a roadway of whatever sort, including, but not limited to, avenues,
boulevards, courts, drives, lanes, loops, places, tracts and ways, which is capable of carrying
vehicular traffic.
Ways-of-travel include:
1. Alley.
2. Avenue.
3. Boulevard.
4. Court.
5. Designate.
6. Drive.
7. Lane.
8. Road.
9. Street.
10. Way.
11. "Alley" means a public or private way-of-travel 16 feet or less in width not designated
or improved for general travel and used as a secondary means of access to the rear of
residential, business or other property.
12. "Avenue" means a way-of-travel which runs generally east and west.
13. "Boulevard" means a way-of-travel that extends north and south through the commercial
and industrial district.
14. "Court" means a way-of-travel under two grid blocks long.
15. "Designate" means to name a way-of-travel whether by name or number.
16. "Drive" means a way-of-travel.
17. "Lane" means a way-of-travel one block long.
18. "Place" means a way-of-travel.
19. "Road" means a way-of-travel which heretofore has been designated a road.
20. "Street" means a way-of-travel which generally runs north and south.
21. "Way" means a way-of-travel.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

15.01.070 Liability.
It is the specific intent of this title to place the obligation of compliance upon the property owner
or party subject to the provisions of the chapters contained within this title. Nothing contained
in this title is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the
part of the city of Burlington officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting
from the failure of the property owner or party subject to the provisions of the chapters contained
within this title, to comply with the provisions of this title, or by reason or in consequence of
any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this code by the
city of Burlington officers, employees or agents. This title is not intended to create or otherwise
establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially
protected or benefited by its terms.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

15.01.080 Minimum requirements.
The requirements of this title are minimum requirements. They do not replace, repeal, abrogate,
supersede or effect any other more stringent requirements, rules, regulations, covenants,
standards, or restrictions. Where this title imposes requirements which are more protective of
human health or the environment than those set forth elsewhere, the provisions of this title shall
prevail.
Approvals and permits granted under this title are not waivers of the requirements of any other
laws. Compliance is still required with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations,
including rules promulgated under authority of this title.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

15.01.090 Violations and penalty.
All acts or omissions in violation of any provision contained within this title, or acts or omissions
that cause or contribute to a violation of any provision contained within this title, are hereby
determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and shall constitute
a public nuisance. Further, as specified in chapter 1.24 BMC, such acts or omissions shall be
subject to fines and abatement under chapter 8.12 BMC, criminal penalties as set forth in chapter
1.24 BMC, penalties for civil infractions as set forth in chapter 1.34 BMC, or civil violations as
set forth in chapter 1.44 BMC.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

15.01.100 Appeal.
Appeals of decisions made pursuant to this title shall be filed and processed in accordance with
the applicable procedures identified in BMC Title 14A.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

15.01.110 Severability.
If any portion of this title is found to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, such finding
shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other section of this title.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)
§ 15.04.010 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION § 15.04.050