15.10.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Addresses."
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021)

15.10.020 Application.
This chapter shall be applicable to all buildings and structures used or constructed within the city
of Burlington.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021)

15.10.030 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform methodology for assigning way-of-travel
names and building address numbers under the administration of the planning department and
permit center, and to establish the authority to retroactively remedy incorrect addresses, and
improve signage for existing building and premises identification.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021)

15.10.040 Authority.
The provisions of this chapter are authorized pursuant to chapter19.27 RCW, chapter 51-51
WAC, the codes adopted by this chapter, and other applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021)

15.10.050 Community development department to assign address numbers.
A. The community development department shall determine the address of any property in the
city in accordance with the numbering system established in this chapter.
B. Addresses for new buildings, premises, and tenant spaces shall be assigned as part of the
building permit review process. If no associated building permit exists, an address shall be
assigned using a Type I review process in accordance with the provisions of BMC Title
14A.
C. Applications for address assignment shall be made on forms provided by the community
development director and shall include all of the information required by the form.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021)

15.10.060 Numbering system prescribed.
A. The numerical designation of all doorways and entrances to buildings, lots, yards and
grounds fronting upon the several ways, avenues, streets, drives and places of the city are
established in accordance with the following system:
1. Except where otherwise specified, 100 numbers are allotted to each block, the city of
Burlington addressing grid map, to be spaced evenly along the grid with 50 numbers
on each side of the street or way in each grid line. The grid has been adjusted in areas
of the city where the blocks differ in length. Even numbers shall be used on the
southerly side of avenues or ways extending in an easterly and westerly direction and
on the easterly side of streets or ways extending in a northerly and southerly direction;
odd numbers shall be used on the northerly side of avenues or ways extending in an
easterly and westerly direction and on the westerly side of streets or ways extending
in a northerly and southerly direction.
2. In the case of irregular drives, places, streets, ways or avenues, the frontages shall be
numbered as near as may be possible, according to the uniform series of block
numbers with which they most nearly correspond.
B. For new buildings, a site plan showing the footprint of the building, all front door entrances,
location and name of adjoining street or way and a north arrow is required. The number for
new buildings is assigned according to this section as follows:
1. If the project is multifamily with multiple entrances, each building receives an address
and numbering is assigned for that building with the first floor having the 100 series,
the second floor 200 series, the third floor 300 series.
2. A single entrance for a multiple tenant building receives one common number, with
each tenant receiving a separate suite number. Separate entrance doors receive a
separate address.
C. New addresses are added to the address database, mapped and copies distributed to
emergency service agencies, utilities, the post office and city departments.
D. Whenever the irregularity of plats, the changing direction of streets, avenues, or other
highways, the interruption of the continuity of highways or any other condition causes
doubt or difference of opinion as to the correct number of any piece of property or any
building thereon, the number shall be determined by the department. The planning
department shall be guided by the specific provisions of this chapter as far as they are
applicable, and on the recommendations of the fire and police departments.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021)

15.10.070 Way-of-travel names.
A. The city council shall designate all public or private ways-of-travel, now existing or
hereafter created; provided, that a name shall be designated that is different than any
existing way-of-travel name currently in the address system and that will not be easily
confused with an existing name.
B. The baseline for ways-of-travel shall be Fairhaven Avenue and shall bear the suffix "E"
(east) on the east side of Burlington Boulevard and the suffix "W" (west) on the west side
of Burlington Boulevard.
C. The meridian line for ways-of-travel running generally north-south shall be Burlington
Boulevard and shall bear the suffix "N" (north) on the north side of Fairhaven Avenue and
the suffix "S" (south) on the south side of Fairhaven Avenue.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021)

15.10.080 Building owner to post and maintain address signs.
A. The owner of any building or other structure shall maintain the street number of each
§ 15.10.080 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION § 15.10.090
building and structure in a conspicuous place over or near the principal street entrance, or
in other conspicuous places so that the address may be easily seen from the street.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any new building to obtain and post an
approved sign as required by this chapter.
C. Exception. Where there are multiple buildings on a site, the department may waive the
requirement for posting an address on appurtenant or accessory buildings where individual
identification of each building is not essential. Where a property has frontage along more
than one named street or for any other property where there may be confusion regarding
the address of a building or structure, the department may require the complete address,
including street number and street name, to be conspicuously posted.
D. Buildings served by a private road or a common driveway shall post their address
number(s) at the head of the road or driveway in a manner that can be easily read from the
intersecting street. This posting requirement shall be in addition to the requirement to post
the number on the building itself. Where the existing street grid may not adequately allow
for the assignment of street addresses which will promote the easy locating of such
addresses, or for any other reason consistent with the intent of this chapter, the planning
department may assign a name to the private road or common driveway which shall be used
for addressing purposes. The city council shall assign a name to the private road or common
driveway when there are four or more parcels served by it. In addition, one or more
property owners along the road or driveway may be required to post a sign displaying the
assigned name at a location near the intersection of the road or driveway with a named
public street.
E. Numbers and letters shall be of approved reflective material that is easily legible and shall
have a high contrast with the background color. Letters and numbers shall be white
reflective material and shall not be less than five inches (76 mm) in height. The sign
background shall be blue reflective material. The department shall maintain a list of
vendors approved to make address signs.
F. Approved address signs shall be posted prior to approval of a final building permit
inspection or occupancy approval.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021)

15.10.090 Enforcement.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter to post an address or number other than an address or
number assigned by the city of Burlington in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter to offer any unit, suite, tenant space, or building for
sale, lease, or occupancy that has not been addressed in accordance with this chapter.
C. Should the department find that any building, structure or premises is not provided with
numbers as herein required, or is not correctly numbered, the department shall notify the
owner, agent or tenant of the correct street or unit number and shall require that the same
shall be properly placed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 30 days
unless additional time is provided for in writing by the department. Failure to respond to
such notification shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1906 (Exh. A), 2021)
§ 15.12.010 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION § 15.12.060