16.40.010 Title.
This chapter shall be called "Survey and Design Standards."
(Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

16.40.020 Application.
This chapter shall apply as follows:
A. Plats and binding site plans shall be subject to this chapter;
B. The design specifications identified in this chapter shall apply to the design and
construction of streets, roads, drainage facilities, sidewalks and other improvements
serving plats and binding site plans;
C. No plat or binding site plan shall be granted final approval unless the streets, roads,
drainage facilities, sidewalks, and other improvements required by this chapter have been
constructed, installed, or provided.
(Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

16.40.030 Purpose.
A. Ensure that plats and binding site plans include appropriate provisions for the public health,
safety, and general welfare, for open spaces, drainage ways, streets or roads, alleys, other
public ways, transit stops, potable water supplies, sanitary wastes, parks and recreation,
playgrounds, schools and school grounds, sidewalks, and planning features that assure safe
walking conditions for students traveling to and from school;
B. Establish uniform standards for the preparation of plats and binding site plans;
C. Ensure that plats and binding site plans are accurate and consistent with applicable laws
and regulations;
D. Establish uniform design standards for the design and construction of streets, roads,
drainage facilities, sidewalks, and other infrastructure or improvements within plats and
binding site plans.
E. Ensure that streets, roads, drainage facilities, sidewalks, and other improvements serving
plats and binding site plans are compatible with, and can be easily connected to, adjoining
properties and developments, thereby creating a uniform and interconnected system of
public improvements.
(Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

16.40.040 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to chapters 36.70, 36.70A,36.70B, 58.17 RCW and other
applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)
§ 16.40.050 LAND DIVISIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS § 16.40.050

16.40.050 Access standards.
The design standards in this section shall apply to the design and construction of all plats and
binding site plans. Vehicle and pedestrian access shall be provided as follows:
A. General.
1. Plats and binding site plans shall be served by one or more streets providing adequate
ingress and egress.
2. The alignment of streets within plats and binding site plans shall conform to the city's
street plan and allow streets adjoining the plat or binding site plan to be extended
through the site.
3. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable and in no event
shall the angle formed be less than 30 degrees.
4. Street networks shall conform to any applicable fire code requirements to ensure
adequate access for emergency vehicles and equipment.
5. Unless warranted by special physical circumstances, the right-of-way for public
streets shall be at least 60 feet wide.
6. Alleys shall be at least 16 feet wide plus such additional width as shall be necessary
for an adequate turning radius.
7. Public streets, roads, alleys, and sidewalks shall conform to applicable standards
identified in chapter 12.28 BMC.
8. Low impact development features such as bioretention areas, rain gardens, and
permeable paving shall be incorporated into the design and construction of all streets
unless demonstrated to be infeasible through an engineering analysis. In determining
the feasibility of such low impact development features, an engineering analysis shall
be submitted and reviewed by the city engineer. This analysis should consider site
characteristics such as soil and ground water conditions, and anticipated traffic
volumes. The analysis should be consistent with the Washington State Department of
Ecology's "Stormwater Manual for Western Washington" and the design and site
evaluation guidance in the Puget Sound Partnership's "Low Impact Development
Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound."
9. All streets, bridges, sidewalks, and pedestrian access facilities shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with plans and specifications prepared or approved by the
city engineer.
10. All dedicated streets shall be graded to their full width with adequate drainage
provided prior to acceptance for public use. Grades shall be established by the city
engineer and all streets shall be surfaced according to plans and specifications
prepared or approved by the city engineer.
11. Land divisions shall create, and contribute to, a fully connected network of streets.
Unless explicitly waived by these requirements streets shall be extended to connect
with adjacent streets and stubbed out to abutting properties to facilitate future access.
B. Private Streets. Vehicle and pedestrian access should be provided by public streets
dedicated to the city. However, private streets and shared driveways may, at the city's
discretion, be authorized if all of the following criteria are met:
1. The goals of the zoning code to provide for adequate light, air and usable open space
between structures would not be compromised; and
2. The dedication and improvement of a public street is not necessary to facilitate the
provision of public utilities such as water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage; and
3. The dedication and improvement of a street is not necessary or desirable in order to
provide on-street parking for overflow conditions; and
4. No potential safety hazards would result from multiple access points between existing
and future developments onto a roadway without curbs and with limited sight lines;
and
5. There is no potential for extending the street system to connect with existing streets,
or to serve potential development sites adjacent to the plat or binding site plan; and
6. Private streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable
standards identified in chapter 17.85 BMC.
C. Sidewalks and Pedestrian Access.
1. Sidewalks and pedestrian access shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the applicable standards identified in chapter 17.85 BMC.
2. Sidewalks should be provided along both sides of streets unless this requirement is
explicitly waived by the city's adopted standards for public or private streets.
(Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

16.40.060 Design of lots and blocks.
A. Blocks. To implement the comprehensive plan, minimize travel distances, and create a
fully interconnected street network, developments must produce complete blocks bounded
by a connecting network of streets in accordance with the following standards:
1. Blocks shall be designed and arranged to provide for the safe and efficient movement
of vehicles and pedestrians.
2. Blocks shall be identified on the face of the plat or binding site plan by letters or
numbers.
3. Design standards for blocks in areas zoned RD, RA, MUR, or MUC-1:
a. Maximum block length: 600 feet.
b. Maximum block perimeter: 1,600 feet.
4. Design standard for blocks in areas zoned MUC-2, CI-1, or PFT-1:
a. Maximum block length: 600 feet.
b. Maximum block perimeter: 2,000 feet.
§ 16.40.060 LAND DIVISIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS § 16.40.070
5. Design standards for blocks in areas zoned CI-2 or PFT-2: None.
6. Design standards for blocks in areas zoned PC: None.
7. General Exceptions. An exception may be granted to standards for maximum block
length or perimeter as minimally necessary due to severe topography, the presence of
wetlands, or other significant critical area constraints, or for small sites. Exceptions
may also be granted when street connections or stubs cannot feasibly be provided
based on one or more of the factors listed in subsection (C)(2) of this section. In such
cases mid-block pedestrian paths may be required in order to provide adequate
pedestrian circulation.
8. Partial Blocks. Exceptions may be granted to the maximum permitted block perimeter
in order to allow for the establishment of partial blocks bounded on one or more sides
by a street(s) stubbed out to the site boundaries. When authorized, partial blocks shall
comply with the applicable standard for block length and streets stubbed out to the
site boundaries shall not be more than 150 feet in length, as measured from the nearest
intersection.
B. Lots.
1. Lots shall either adjoin a street, or be served by a private access easement if permitted
by this chapter and chapter 17.85 BMC.
2. Lots shall be numbered with reference to blocks.
3. The creation of through lots is prohibited in areas zoned RD.
C. Street Connections.
1. Street connections shall be provided to all streets and street stub-ends that abut the
boundary of the land division.
2. Streets shall be extended to the boundaries of the land division and stub-ends shall be
provided to allow for future connections. Exceptions may be granted to this
requirement as follows:
a. Where the abutting property is fully developed and there is little or no possibility
of redevelopment occurring.
b. Where the abutting property is zoned PFT or PC.
c. Where the abutting property is located in unincorporated Skagit County and is
zoned Ag-NRL.
d. Where the presence of significant critical area constraints make future street
extensions infeasible.
e. Where the property abuts a railroad or limited access highway right-of-way that
makes future street extensions infeasible.
(Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

16.40.070 Utilities.
A. Easements shall be provided for all utilities including storm water facilities.
B. All utility easements shall be designed and configured to allow access for inspection,
maintenance, and repair purposes.
C. The design and configuration of easements for storm water and sanitary sewer facilities
shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer.
D. Low impact development techniques shall be incorporated into the design and construction
of all plats and binding site plans in accordance with the provisions of chapter 17.70 BMC.
E. All storm water facilities shall be approved by the city engineer and shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the applicable standards identified in BMC Title 14.
F. Above ground utility installations, such as power and telephone lines, shall not be permitted
unless the city engineer determines that topographic or geologic conditions make below
ground installation infeasible.
G. Each lot in a plat or binding site plan shall be provided with a connection to a public water
supply system. Lots used for nonbuilding purposes shall be exempt from this requirement
provided a note is included on the face of the plat restricting the use of the lot to
nonbuilding purposes.
H. Public water supply systems and connections shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with any standards adopted by the Skagit Public Utility District.
I. Each lot in a plat or binding site plan shall be provided with a connection to the city's
sanitary sewer system. Lots used for nonbuilding purposes shall be exempt from this
requirement provided a note is included on the face of the plat restricting the use of the lot
to nonbuilding purposes.
J. Sewer system components and connections shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with any applicable standards adopted by the city of Burlington and shall be
approved by the city engineer.
K. Service Mains and Fire Hydrants. Service mains and fire hydrants shall be installed and
inspected by the city engineer and fire marshal prior to final approval of plats and binding
site plans. The design and construction of service mains and fire hydrants shall be
consistent with all applicable standards and regulations, and all plans shall be approved by
the city engineer and fire marshal.
(Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

16.40.080 Survey requirements.
Plats and binding site plans shall be based on a thorough survey and shall be prepared by a land
surveyor licensed in the state of Washington. Plats and binding site plans shall be consistent with
the following requirements:
A. The surveyor shall furnish the city engineer with a full set of survey notes which include:
1. The ties to each permanent monument;
2. At least three durable, distinctive reference points or monuments;
§ 16.40.080 LAND DIVISIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS § 16.40.090
3. Sufficient data to determine readily the bearing and length of each line;
4. The base meridian referred to.
B. A traverse of the boundaries of the subdivision, short subdivision, or binding site plan and
all lots and blocks shall close within one foot in 5,000 feet, as required by chapter 332-130
WAC.
C. Primary survey control points shall be referenced to section corners and monuments, and
the corners of adjoining plats or binding site plans, or portions of plats or binding site plans,
shall be identified and ties shown.
D. Prior to final plat or binding site plan approval, permanent control monuments shall be
established at:
1. All controlling comers on the boundaries of the plat or binding site plan;
2. The intersections of centerlines of roads within the plat or binding site plan;
3. The beginning and ends of curves on centerlines;
4. All block corners.
E. Permanent control monuments may be placed on the offset lines. The position and type of
every permanent monument shall be noted on all plats and binding site plans. Permanent
control monuments shall be of a type approved by the city engineer.
F. Permanent control monuments within the streets shall be set after the streets are graded.
G. Each lot corner shall be marked by a three-quarter-inch galvanized iron pipe, 24 inches in
length, or approved equivalent, driven into the ground, set with C cap per the requirements
of RCW 58.19.120.
H. Prior to final plat or binding site plan approval the city engineer shall verify the required
permanent control monuments and lot corner markers have been installed in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
I. Property contiguous to water. If any land in a plat or binding site plan is contiguous to a
body of water, a meander line shall be established along the shore at a safe distance back
from the ordinary high water mark. Property lying below and beyond the meander line shall
be defined by distance along the side property lines extended from the meander line. If the
thread of a stream lies within a plat or binding site plan or forms the boundary of a plat or
binding site plan, such thread shall be defined by bearings and distances as it exists at the
time of the survey.
(Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

16.40.090 Preliminary plat and binding site plan requirements.
Preliminary plats and binding site plans shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state
of Washington and shall include all of the following:
A. A complete survey of the parcel being divided;
B. The name of the proposed plat or binding site plan;
C. North point and scale;
D. The location of existing property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, natural hazards,
critical areas and critical area buffers, significant topographic features, and existing
utilities;
E. A legal description of the land contained within the plat or binding site plan;
F. The names and addresses of all persons, firms and corporations holding interest in the
lands, including easement rights and interest;
G. The proposed locations, dimensions, and names of streets, alleys, and roadways;
H. The location and dimensions of all proposed lots, lot lines, easements, common areas,
storm water facilities, and dedications;
I. The locations, dimensions, and centerlines of all public and private streets, roadways, and
access easements adjoining the proposed plat or binding site plan;
J. The approximate location of utilities adjoining the proposed plat or binding site plan;
K. The proposed location and routing of utilities necessary to serve lots within the proposed
plat or binding site plan;
L. The names of adjoining plats or binding site plans;
M. The surveyor's signature, license stamp, name, and contact information;
N. The date of the survey;
O. All existing monuments and markers located by the survey;
P. The zoning classification applicable to the land within the plat or binding site plan;
Q. The conditions of or the limitations on dedications, if any, including slope rights;
R. Contour intervals as required, based upon city datum;
S. Any other information required by Burlington Municipal Code or deemed necessary by the
director for purposes of demonstrating compliance with regulatory requirements.
(Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

16.40.100 Final plat and binding site plan requirements.
Final plats and binding site plans shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state of
Washington and shall include all of the following:
A. A complete survey of the section or sections in which the plat, or replat, is located, or as
many sections as may be necessary to properly orient the plat within the section or sections;
B. Complete field and computation notes as provided in BMC § 16.40.080;
C. The final plat or binding site plan shall be printed on paper or other material acceptable to
the Skagit County auditor and shall be 18 inches by 24 inches in size;
D. The accuracy and completeness of the final plat or binding site plan shall be the sole
§ 16.40.100 LAND DIVISIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS § 16.40.100
responsibility of the surveyor preparing the plat or binding site plan. The surveyor shall
make field surveys and investigations as necessary to ensure the map is complete and
accurate in every detail;
E. The final plat or binding site plan shall be presented at a scale not smaller than 100 feet to
one inch;
F. The final plat or binding site plan shall include the following:
1. The name of the plat or binding site plan;
2. The lines, widths and names of all streets, avenues, places, parks or other public
property, and the location of monuments marking the same;
3. The length and direction of all lot lines, also the angles made by the lot lines with the
street lines;
4. The location of control points and monuments together with all ties;
5. The names of all adjoining plats and binding site plans;
6. The scale and north point;
7. The boundary of the tract as covered by the plat or binding site plan showing courses
and distance on the plat;
8. The initial point;
9. All protective improvements and restrictions on uses;
10. All dedications and all conveyances to a homeowner's nonprofit maintenance
corporation in lieu of dedication;
11. Any notes, restrictions, or information required by Burlington Municipal Code or as
a condition of preliminary plat or binding site plan approval;
12. Inscriptions or notes on the face of the plat or binding site plan setting forth all
limitations and conditions for the use of land;
13. Inscription or notes on the face of the plat or binding site plan requiring that any
development of the subject property be in conformance with the plat or binding site
plan;
14. Tracts shall be individually identified by letters or numbers and notes shall be
provided indicating the purpose, intended ownership, and permitted or prohibited uses
for each tract.
G. Any additional information necessary to meet the standards for mapping set forth in chapter
332-130 WAC;
H. In the case of a plat alteration or binding site plan alteration, the lots, blocks, streets, alleys,
easements and parks appearing on the original plat or binding site plan shall be shown by
dotted lines in their proper position in relation to the new arrangement of the plat or binding
site plan, and the new plat or binding site plan shall be shown clearly in solid lines to avoid
ambiguity;
I. The following certificates and signature blocks shall be included on the face of the plat or
binding site plan. The director may specify the specific content, or format, of the required
signature blocks and certificates unless a specific format is prescribed by state law.
1. A dated surveyor's certificate including the surveyor's signature and license stamp;
2. A certificate giving a full and correct description of the lands divided as they appear
on the plat or binding site plan, including a statement that the subdivision, short
subdivision, or binding site plan has bean made with the free consent and in
accordance with the desires of the owners. If the plat is subject to a dedication, the
certificate or a separate written instrument shall also contain the dedication of all
streets and other areas to the public, an individual or individuals, religious society or
societies or to any corporation, public or private as shown on the plat and a waiver of
all claims for damages against any governmental authority which may be occasioned
to the adjacent land by the established construction, drainage and maintenance of the
road. The certificate or instrument of dedication shall be signed and acknowledged
before a notary public by all parties having any ownership interest in the land
subdivided and recorded as part of the final plat;
3. A statement of approval from the city engineer as to the survey data, the layout of
streets, alleys, and other rights-of-way, design of bridges, sewage and water systems,
and other structures, and indicating the plat complies with BMC Titles 12, 13, and 14;
4. A statement of approval from the director indicating the plat or binding site plan
complies with BMC Titles 15, 16, 17, and 18;
5. For subdivisions, a signature block indicating the city council's approval;
6. Be acknowledged by the person filing the plat before the auditor of the county in
which the land is located, or any other officer who is authorized by law to take
acknowledgment of deeds, and a certificate of said acknowledgment shall be enclosed
or annexed to such plat or binding site plan and recorded therewith;
7. A certification from the Skagit County treasurer that all taxes and delinquent
assessments for which the property may be liable as of the date of certification have
been duly paid, satisfied or discharged;
8. A certification from the city treasurer that all taxes and delinquent assessments for
which the property may be liable as of the date of certification have been duly paid,
satisfied or discharged;
9. Be acknowledged by the person filing the plat before the Skagit County auditor or
any other officer who is authorized by law to take acknowledgment of deeds, and a
certificate of the acknowledgment shall be enclosed or annexed to the plat or binding
site plan and recorded with it;
10. For binding site plans where a condominium or condominium conversion is proposed,
the final plan drawing shall include a statement indicating that the plan is either for a
"condominium development" or a "condominium conversion."
(Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

16.40.110 Dedications.
§ 16.40.110 LAND DIVISIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS § 16.40.110
A. All subdivisions and short subdivisions shall include adequate provisions for the dedication
of drainage ways, streets, alleys, easements, critical areas, parks, and other public open
space areas as may be required by Burlington Municipal Code, Washington State law, or
other applicable regulatory requirements.
B. All dedications shall be clearly and precisely indicated on the face of plat or binding site
plan along with the intended purpose of the dedication and any associated restrictions on
its use.
C. Protective improvements and easements allowing access, inspection, and maintenance of
such improvements shall be dedicated to the city in accordance with applicable municipal
code requirements.
D. City-owned and operated storm water facilities, infiltration areas, and conveyance or
collection systems, as well as easements allowing access, inspection, and maintenance of
such features shall be dedicated to the city in accordance with applicable municipal code
requirements.
E. Easements being dedicated, and their intended purpose, shall be shown on the face of the
plat or binding site plan and included in the certificate of dedication.
F. Convenient pedestrian and vehicular access to every lot shall be provided by a dedicated
street unless a private street is authorized pursuant to BMC § 16.40.050(B).
G. If the city concludes that the public interest will be served the city may, in lieu of requiring
the dedication to the public of land in a subdivision for protective improvements, drainage
ways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks and other open space, allow the land to be conveyed
to a homeowner's nonprofit maintenance corporation. In such cases, prior to the time of
filing a final plat or binding site plan for approval, articles of incorporation and bylaws of
the grantee organization and evidence of the conveyance or of a binding commitment to
convey shall be provided to the city. The articles of incorporation shall provide that
membership in the corporation shall be conditioned upon ownership of land in the plat or
binding site plan, that the corporation is empowered to assess the land for costs of
construction and maintenance of the improvements and property owned by the corporation,
and that the assessment shall be a lien upon the land. The city attorney shall review and
approve the articles of incorporation and bylaws as to compliance with this provision. The
city council may impose other conditions as it deems appropriate to assure that property
and improvements owned by the corporation will be adequately constructed and
maintained.
H. Any dedication, donation or grant as shown on the face of the plat or binding site plan shall
be considered, to all intents and purposes, as a quitclaim deed to the grantee or grantees,
for his, her or their use for the purpose intended by the donors or grantors.
(Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)
§ 16.50.010 LAND DIVISIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS § 16.50.060