17.01.010 Title.
This title shall be called the "Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance." This chapter shall be called
"General Provisions."
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.020 Application.
A. This chapter shall apply to all chapters in this title. The provisions of this title shall apply
to both public and private use of all land within the corporate limits of the city of
Burlington.
B. No use shall be conducted, and no development, building, structure, or appurtenance shall
be initiated, erected, relocated, remodeled, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged unless in
compliance with the provisions of this title and with the comprehensive plan, and then only
after securing all permits and approvals required hereby. It shall be unlawful to build or use
any building or structure, or to use premises in the city, for any purpose or use other than
the uses listed as being permitted in the district in which such building, land, or premises is
located.
C. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Except when otherwise noted it is not intended by this title to interfere with, abrogate or
annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between private parties. However,
where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land and/or building or in
general requires higher standards than other ordinances, rules, or private agreements, the
provisions of this title shall govern.
D. No division of land pursuant to BMC Title 16 shall occur unless in compliance with the
provisions of this title.
E. Except as otherwise noted this title is not intended to regulate the erection, construction, or
reconstruction of public streets, power poles, streetlights, utility lift stations, transmission
lines, or other public uses within an existing improved, and maintained, city right-of-way
necessary to serve local development and support the general public welfare and
conducted, or carried out, by the city of Burlington, or agents of the city working under a
contract or franchise. Private utilities, projects serving a regional, international, or
statewide need, and infrastructure improvements, and public utilities located outside an
improved public right-of-way shall be subject to this title unless explicitly preempted by
state or federal law.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.030 Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish the following purposes:
A. This title is intended to address the requirements of chapter 36.70A RCW, the Growth
Management Act, and shall be used to implement and enforce the provisions of city's
comprehensive plan. This title is also intended to protect the health, safety, morals,
convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare of the city's population.
B. The specific zones and regulations herein are designed to facilitate adequate provisions of
utilities, schools, parks and housing with essential light, air, privacy, and open space; to
lessen congestion on streets and facilitate the safe movement of traffic thereon; to stabilize
and enhance property values; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to facilitate adequate
provisions for doing public and private business and thereby safeguard the community's
economic structure upon which the prosperity and welfare of all depends and through such
achievements help ensure the safety and security of home life, foster good citizenship,
create and preserve a more healthful, serviceable and attractive municipality and
environment in which to live.
C. To most effectively accomplish these purposes, this title divides the city into zones wherein
the location, height and use of buildings, the use of land, the size of yards and other open
space, and the provision of off-street parking and loading are regulated and restricted in
accordance with the comprehensive plan for the city of Burlington. These zones and
regulations are hereby deemed necessary and are made with reasonable consideration,
among other things, as to the character of each zone and its particular suitability for specific
uses, the need for such uses, the common rights and interests of all within the zone as well
as those of the general public, and with the view of conserving and encouraging the most
appropriate use of land throughout the city.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.040 Authority.
This title is created pursuant to the authority set forth in chapters 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B
RCW and other applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.050 Definitions.
For the purpose of this title, the words listed in this chapter shall have the following meanings
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the singular include the plural, and
words used in the plural include the singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory, the word
"may" denotes a use of discretion in making a decision; the words "used" or "occupied" shall
be considered as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied."
"A"
"Abandoned sign" means a sign structure that has ceased to be used, and the owner or lessor of
the sign structure intends no longer to use the sign structure for the display of sign copy, or as
otherwise defined by state law. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that a sign which no longer
identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity, and/or
for which no legal owner can be found, is an abandoned sign.
"Accessory building" or "accessory structure" means a subordinate building or structure, the use
of which is incidental to the use of the main, or primary, building on the same lot.
Accessory Dwelling Unit or Accessory Dwelling. See "dwelling" definitions.
"Accessory use" means a use incidental and subordinate to a principal use and located on the
same lot or in the same building as the principal use.
"Adult entertainment use" means an adult motion picture theater or topless club as defined
below:
1. "Adult motion picture theater" means a place of public assembly in which, in an enclosed
building, motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television, or any other such visual
media, are presented which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual
activities," as defined herein.
2. "Topless club" means a public or private club employing persons exposing "specified
anatomical areas" as defined herein.
"Affordable housing" means, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, residential housing
whose monthly costs, including utilities other than telephone, do not exceed 30 percent of the
monthly income of a household whose income is:
1. For rental housing, 60 percent of the median household income adjusted for household
size for Skagit County as reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development; or
2. For owner-occupied housing, 80 percent of the median household income adjusted for
household size for Skagit County as reported by the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development.
"Agriculture" means the production of horticultural, viticulture, floricultural, dairy, apiary,
vegetable, or animal products or of berries, grain, hay, straw, turf, seed, Christmas trees not
subject to the excise tax imposed by RCW 84.33.100 through 84.33.140, finfish in upland
hatcheries, or livestock. Agriculture does not include community gardens or residential
gardening.
1. "Agriculture, rural" means agricultural uses or activities other than urban agriculture.
Rural agriculture specifically includes animal husbandry, the keeping of large domestic
animals such as horses, cattle, goats, and hogs, commercial activities involving livestock
and poultry, the keeping of roosters or more than four hens, and the construction or use of
agricultural buildings such as barns or equipment sheds associated with an activity falling
within the definition of rural agriculture.
2. "Agriculture, urban" means the commercial production of plants or crops, nurseries,
apiaries and beekeeping, the keeping of up to four hens in residential areas, and the
construction of greenhouses, potting sheds, chicken coops, and other structures associated
with an activity falling with the definition of urban agriculture.
"Alley" means a public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting
property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
"Alteration" means a change, rearrangement, expansion, or modification of an existing building,
structure, use, development, or facility. Alterations also include moving buildings, structures,
and uses from one location to another. In buildings used for business, commercial, industrial or
other similar purposes the installation or rearrangement of interior partitions affecting more than
one-third of a single floor area shall be considered an alteration.
"Animated sign" means a sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion. Note that
animation is prohibited by BMC § 17.95.135(B)(2), except for temporary signs in BMC

17.01.060 Land use permit required.
A land use permit issued pursuant to BMC Title 14A shall be required to establish or change use
as provided by this title. Compliance with the procedural requirements set forth in BMC Title
14A shall be required.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.070 Condition of ministerial errors.
The director may at any time amend an administrative decision to correct ministerial errors
clearly identifiable from the public record. Such a correction does not affect any time limit
provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.080 Administrative interpretations.
A. The director shall be authorized to interpret the meaning of words, phrases and sentences
which relate to the determining of uses permitted in the various districts, approval or
disapproval of development plans, or other related zoning actions.
B. The director may permit a use in a zone that is not listed as permitted or conditional in the
zone, if the director determines the use is consistent with the intent of the zone, the
applicable goals and policies of the comprehensive plan, and has similar characteristics and
impacts to the other uses listed as permitted or conditional in the zone; provided, that the
use is not prohibited or listed as permitted or conditional in another zone.
C. An administrative interpretation may be appealed using the process set forth in BMC Title
14A.
D. Should a conflict occur between the provisions of this title or between this title and the
laws, regulations, codes or rules promulgated by another authority having jurisdiction
within the city, the most restrictive requirement shall be applied, except when constrained
by federal or state law, or where specifically provided otherwise in this code.
E. In all cases this title shall be interpreted and applied in a manner which is consistent with,
and best implements the comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.090 Zoning for annexed land.
A. General. At the time of any parcel of land being annexed to the city, the property shall be
zoned consistent with the Burlington zoning districts and the comprehensive plan amended
if necessary. Application for the rezone and necessary amendment may be done
simultaneously with the request for annexation.
B. Urban Holding Overlay. If a specific zoning designation has not been assigned to an
annexation area at the time of annexation the urban holding overlay zone shall apply to the
annexation area.
C. Urban Holding Regulations. The following standards shall apply to all areas subject to an
urban holding overlay:
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Detached dwellings on existing lots;
b. Agriculture, all types.
2. Accessory Uses. Any accessory use permitted in the RD-1 zone (BMC § 17.15.070).
3. Development Standards. The development standards applicable to the RD-1 zone
shall apply (BMC § 17.15.100) except that land divisions shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.100 Relationship to other titles, chapters and codes.
The administrative provisions of BMC Title 14A shall apply to requests for project permits under
this title.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.110 Violation and penalties.
A. All acts or omissions in violation of any provision contained within this title, or acts or
omissions that cause or contribute to a violation of any provision contained within this title,
are hereby determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and
shall constitute a public nuisance. Further, as specified in chapter 1.24 BMC, such acts or
omissions shall be subject to enforcement fines and abatement under chapter 8.12 BMC,
criminal penalties as set forth in chapter 1.24 BMC, penalties for civil infractions as set
forth in chapter 1.34 BMC, or civil violations as set forth in chapter 1.44 BMC.
B. It is a violation of this title for any person to initiate or maintain or cause to be initiated or
maintained the use of any structure, land or property within the city without first obtaining
the permits or authorization required for the use by this title.
C. It is a violation of this title for any person to use, construct, locate, demolish or cause to be
used, constructed, located, or demolished any structure, land or property within the city in
any manner that is not permitted by the terms of any permit or authorization issued pursuant
to this title; provided, that the terms or conditions are explicitly stated on the permit or the
approved plans.
D. It is a violation of this title to remove or deface any sign, notice, complaint or order required
by or posted in accordance with BMC Title 15 or this title.
E. It is a violation of this title to misrepresent any material fact in any application, plans or
other information submitted to obtain any land use authorization.
F. It is a violation of this title for anyone to fail to comply with the requirements of this title.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.115 Duty to enforce.
A. It shall be the duty of the director to enforce this title. The director may call upon the police,
fire, health or other appropriate city departments to assist in enforcement.
B. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the director may, with the consent of the owner or
occupier of a building or premises, or pursuant to a lawfully issued warrant, enter any
building or premises subject to the consent or warrant to perform the duties imposed by the
zoning code.
C. This title shall be enforced for the benefit of the health, safety and welfare of the general
public, and not for the benefit of any particular person or class of persons.
D. It is the intent of this title to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon
the owner, occupier or other person responsible for the condition of the land and buildings
within the scope of this code.
E. No provision of or term used in this code is intended to impose any duty upon the city or
any of its officers or employees which would subject them to damages in a civil action.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.120 Appeal.
Appeals of decisions made pursuant to this title shall be subject to the procedures and regulations
set forth in BMC Title 14A.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.01.125 Severability.
If my portion of this title is found to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, such finding
shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other section of this title.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)