17.110.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the agricultural heritage credit program is to provide additional residential
density in specific zoning districts in exchange for a fee dedicated to transfer and/or purchase of
development rights through the Skagit County farmland legacy program. The program provides
a voluntary, incentive-based process for permanently preserving agricultural lands that provide
a public benefit. The provisions of this program are intended to supplement land use regulations,
resource protection efforts and open space acquisition programs and to encourage increased
residential development density inside the city where it can best be accommodated with the least
impacts on the natural environment and public services by:
A. Providing an effective and predictable incentive process for agricultural land property
owners to preserve lands with a public benefit;
B. Providing an efficient and streamlined administrative review system to ensure that transfers
of development rights to receiving sites are evaluated in a timely way and balanced with
other county goals and policies, and are adjusted to the specific conditions of each receiving
site.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.110.020 Application.
A. The term "receiving zone" as used in this chapter shall mean the Burlington urban growth
area (UGA).
B. Agricultural heritage credits are assigned towards the purchase of development rights from
land zoned agriculture natural resource in the Skagit County zoning ordinance and
designated as significant open space connections on the development right acquisition area
map, attached as Exhibit A to the ordinance codified in this chapter.
C. The residential use in the receiving zone shall be permitted at the rate of one additional
residential dwelling unit per Burlington agricultural heritage credit.
D. The applicant may opt to acquire development rights from farmland that is included in the
Skagit farmland legacy program and transfer those rights into the receiving zone at a rate
comparable to the Burlington agricultural heritage credit formula.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.110.030 Definition of terms used in this chapter.3.
A. "Burlington agricultural heritage credit program" means a voluntary program where
density of new development may be increased as specified in this title through the purchase
of heritage credits at a set price established by resolution directly from the city of
Burlington and the funds are used by the Skagit farmland legacy program towards the
purchase of farmland development rights through an interlocal agreement/contract.
3. Fee is based on initial study "Demand for and Value of Density (Heritage) Credits," June 2009, and study shall be
updated once every five years to ensure accurate economic basis for fee.
B. "Development right" means one residential unit of credit. This is calculated for
unincorporated Skagit County in the agriculture natural resource land zoning district
(AgNRL) at the rate of one residential unit per 40 acres of farmland, or at the rate of one
residential unit per county certified lot of record for development. The farmland legacy
program will accumulate Burlington heritage credits until a willing seller is identified and
there is enough funding to acquire one or more development rights from agricultural
resource land in the area specified on Map Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in
this chapter.
C. "Receiving site" means the site in the recipient zoning district that will receive the
increased density by purchasing Burlington heritage credits at a set fee or transferring
development rights from the sending site. Receiving sites in the city of Burlington are
further described in the MR-NB, B-1, C-1 and R-3 zoning districts.
D. "Sending site" means the site that is to be preserved as agricultural resource land by selling
or transferring its residential development rights to the Skagit farmland legacy program or
other entity approved by the Skagit farmland legacy program. Sending sites shall be
maintained permanently as agricultural lands and no structures may be built on the land.
Sending sites may not be in public ownership. If the sending site consists of more than one
tax lot, the lots must be contiguous. For purposes of this section, lots divided by a street are
considered contiguous if the lots would share a common lot line if the street was removed.
See Map Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, for land generally
eligible as sending sites for the purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.110.040 General requirements.
A. Property eligible for increased residential density is located in the city's urban growth area.
B. Burlington agricultural heritage credits shall be used by the Skagit farmland legacy
program for the acquisition of residential development rights on agricultural resource land
in target locations to protect the agriculture natural resource land around the Burlington
urban growth area as identified on Map Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this
chapter.
C. The residential development rights of agricultural resource land shall be considered as
interests in real property and may be transferred by sale or gift in part or in total as provided
in this section. Once used, credits for residential development rights shall not be used again
and the residential development rights of the subject property providing them shall be
considered severed forever.
D. Residential development rights on agricultural natural resource land may be transferred to
a specific parcel in Burlington or sold to an individual(s) or other entity such as the Skagit
farmland legacy program.
E. On the receiving site, the purchase of Burlington agricultural heritage credits shall increase
the underlying zoning density by one dwelling unit per heritage credit, as further designated
in the MR-NB, B-1, C-1 and R-3 zoning districts. Owners of the parcels within the recipient
zone districts gain additional density for their property when they purchase Burlington
agricultural heritage credits for the receiving site. Detailed use and development standards
for the receiving site are specified in each zoning district.
F. Burlington agricultural heritage credits shall be allocated to a specific receiving site.
G. Conservation easements shall be required for land contained in the sending site to indicate
development limitations on the sending site.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.110.050 Procedure to sell or transfer development rights from sending site.
Note: this process may be amended by the farmland legacy program.
A. The farmland legacy program will receive Burlington heritage credit fees collected by the
city and use those fees to acquire residential development rights on agriculture natural
resource land in the areas identified around the Burlington urban growth area on Map
Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.
B. Property owners participating in the farmland preservation program will use the following
process to sell or transfer their residential development rights:
1. An owner of real property desiring to sell or transfer development rights shall submit
an application for severance of development rights (sending site certification) to the
Skagit farmland legacy program or other such entity as the city council may nominate.
The farmland legacy program shall determine the form of the application and the
information required for a complete application. The farmland legacy program shall
determine if the application may be accepted. Responsibility for preparing a
completed application rests exclusively with the applicant. Application for sending
site certification shall include:
a. A legal description of the site;
b. A title report;
c. A brief description of the site resources and public benefit to be preserved;
d. A site plan showing the proposed conservation easement area, existing and
proposed dwelling units, submerged lands, any area already in a conservation
easement or other similar encumbrance and any other area, except setbacks,
required by Skagit County to remain open.
2. The applicant shall submit a Skagit County lot certification if the lot is less than 40
acres in size and the farmland legacy program shall determine the number of
residential development rights available for severance.
3. A preliminary estimate of value is defined by reviewing the site selection criteria and
pricing formula and the estimate is transmitted to the conservation futures committee
for approval and any additional steps required by the farmland legacy program.
4. To sever residential development rights approved by the farmland legacy program,
the property owner shall execute a restrictive easement, (the "conservation
easement"), granting to the farmland legacy program or a tax exempt organization or
other governmental agency, as approved by the farmland legacy program. The
conservation easement shall preclude subdivision of the subject property. If the
sending site includes federal funds, an appraisal is ordered.
5. Once development rights have been severed from a sending area property in
accordance with this code, the property owner may sell or transfer the development
rights by executing and recording with the Skagit County auditor a deed of residential
development rights, using a deed form prescribed by the farmland legacy program.
The deed shall describe the number of development rights being sold or transferred.
6. The certificate of residential development rights and the restrictive easement shall be
recorded by the escrow agent of the farmland legacy program with the Skagit County
auditor. The owner shall provide a copy of the recorded documents to the farmland
legacy program. When the documents have been recorded and the recorded
documents have been received by the department, the severance is complete.
C. Procedure to Acquire and Use Burlington Agricultural Heritage Credits.
1. A request to increase residential density within a receiving area by purchasing
Burlington agricultural heritage credits must be part of a land use permit application
under chapter 14A.05 BMC. The site plan must indicate the number of Burlington
agricultural heritage credits necessary to implement the project.
2. Prior to final approval of the site plan, the applicant must buy Burlington agricultural
heritage credits at the rate of one credit per additional dwelling unit.
3. The site plan, referencing the Burlington agricultural heritage credits, shall be
recorded by the owner with the Skagit County auditor.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018)