17.15.010 Title.
This chapter shall be called "RD Land Use Zones."
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.020 Application.
This chapter shall apply to all uses and developments in areas zoned RD.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.030 Purpose.
The RD zone is intended to implement the RD comprehensive plan designation by
accommodating lower density residential development in areas that cannot support more
intensive forms of development due to factors such as infrastructure constraints, natural hazards,
access limitations, existing development patterns, or emergency response times. The primary
uses permitted in this zone consist of small residential buildings, such as detached dwellings or
duplexes, and related accessory uses. Other uses may also be permitted in limited circumstances
when consistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. The RD zone is intended
to create and maintain a pattern of development characterized by small, low lying residential
buildings surrounded by open space.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.040 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters35A.63, 36.70A and 36.70B RCW,
and other applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.050 Subzones.
The RD zone consists of two subzones as follows:
A. RD-1. This subzone is a very low density designation that is generally applied to remote or
peripheral areas that are difficult to access, suffer from poor emergency response times, or
have infrastructure deficiencies that will not be remedied by planned improvements. The
RD-1 zone is also appropriate in areas characterized by widespread or severe natural hazard
or critical area constraints.
B. RD-2. The RD-2 subzone is applied to all areas designated "RD" on the comprehensive
plan map that are not designated RD-1.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.060 Permitted primary uses.
Buildings, structures, and lots in the RD-1 and RD-2 zones shall only be used for the following,
unless otherwise provided for in this title:
A. Detached dwellings;
B. Duplex dwellings;
C. Small boarding houses;
D. Small utilities.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.070 Permitted accessory uses.
The following buildings, structures, and uses may be authorized as accessory uses. Accessory
uses shall only be permitted when incidental and subordinate to a legally established primary
use.
A. Normal Residential Appurtenances. The following uses and structures may be authorized
as an accessory use in conjunction with a dwelling: garage, guest cottage, recreation room,
storage shed, noncommercial greenhouse, swimming pool, decks, patios, driveway, on-site
utilities and utility connections, fences, and solar panels;
B. Keeping of not more than six household pets, four of which may be dogs, kept in the home.
This limit shall not include birds, fish or suckling young of pets;
C. Family day care services;
D. Foster family care services;
E. Accessory dwelling units;
F. Home occupations;
G. Telecommunication micro facility, subject to the following requirements, except as limited
by the Telecommunication Act of 1996 as amended:
1. Micro facility shall be located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support
structures. A micro facility may locate on buildings and structures; provided, that the
interior wall or ceiling immediately adjacent to the facility is not designated
residential space.
2. Antennas equal to or less than four feet in height (except omnidirectional antennas
which can be up to six feet in height) and with an area of not more than 580 square
inches in the aggregate (e.g., one-foot diameter parabola or two-foot by one-and-one-
half-foot panel as viewed from any one point) are exempt from the height limitation
of the zone in which they are located. Structures which are nonconforming with
respect to height may be used for the placement of omnidirectional antennas
providing they do not extend more than six feet above the existing structure.
Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be
an expansion of the nonconforming structure.
3. The micro facility shall be exempt from design review if the antenna and related
components are the same color as the existing building, pole or support structure on
which it is proposed to be located.
4. The shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic equipment shall be contained
wholly within a building or structure, or otherwise appropriately concealed,
camouflaged or located underground.
5. Micro facilities for a specific wireless provided shall be separated by a distance equal
to or greater than 1,320 linear feet from other micro facilities of the same wireless
provider.
H. Private parks, playgrounds, open space areas, and community buildings established in
conjunction with, and serving, a residential development permitted by this chapter;
I. Urban agriculture.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.080 Conditional uses.
The following uses shall require a conditional use permit:
A. Horizontally attached dwellings;
B. Small multiunit buildings;
C. Small commercial child day care center;
D. Small meeting facilities;
E. Small private schools;
F. Medium utilities;
G. Accessory buildings with a footprint greater than 800 square feet.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.090 Additional regulations.
A. Manufactured Homes. Manufactured homes may be placed on any lot in an RD zone and
regulated in accordance with the same standards and requirements applicable to site-built
detached homes, except that the following additional regulations shall apply. These
standards and requirements do not apply to legally established, nonconforming
manufactured homes or manufactured homes placed within a manufactured home park.
1. The manufactured home shall be set upon a permanent foundation, as specified by the
manufacturer, and the space between the bottom of the home and the ground shall be
enclosed by concrete or an approved concrete product which may be either load
bearing or decorative;
2. The manufactured home shall have been originally constructed with and shall now
have a composition or wood shake or shingle, coated metal, or similar roof of nominal
3:12 pitch;
3. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding similar in appearance to siding
materials commonly used on conventional site-built uniform building code single-
family residences;
4. The placement of the manufactured home shall be consistent with all other regulatory
requirements generally applicable to new homes.
B. Repealed by Ord. 1933.
C. No trailer, recreational vehicle, boat, camping trailer, fifth wheel, camper, van, car, or other
similar type of mobile unit that is not a permanent structure attached to the ground, shall be
used as a place of habitation or as a dwelling. Only site built structures which comply with
all applicable building code requirements and manufactured or modular homes which meet
applicable state or federal standards for use as a dwelling unit may be used as a place of
habitation or as a dwelling.
D. Repealed by Ord. 1933.
E. Junk storage is only permitted outdoors when completely surrounded by a solid, site
obscuring fence and not visible from an adjoining street or public right-of-way. Outdoor
storage shall also be subject to the following additional restrictions and requirements:
1. Litter, trash, used appliances, used interior furnishings and discarded exterior
furnishings and similar items are prohibited outdoors regardless of location.
2. Junk storage is further limited to piled used lumber, yard cleanup equipment and
similar types of items; it is not intended to include the storage of any items that would
be classified as a nuisance under chapter 8.12 BMC.
F. Where alley access is available, off-street parking spaces and garages shall be accessed
from the alley and no curb cuts shall be permitted. This requirement shall apply to all land
divisions, the construction of new homes and accessory buildings, and requests for curb
cuts to serve existing homes and accessory buildings.
G. Heat pumps or other noise-producing mechanical equipment shall only be permitted within
10 feet of a property line abutting another lot if all equipment shall be equipped with a
noise-baffling screen so that there shall be no audible sound at the property line.
H. New subdivisions or developments that will result in 40 or more lots or dwellings shall
include a common open space area for outdoor recreation.
I. Duplexes.
1. Each dwelling unit shall have its own exterior entrance and a covered porch or landing
shall be provided. The covered area of the porch or landing shall have a minimum
area of 20 square feet and a minimum depth of three feet;
2. For duplexes located on corner lots, the primary entrance of each dwelling unit shall
face a different street frontage;
3. Flat roofs are prohibited. Roofs shall have a pitch of no less than 4:12;
4. If an attached garage is provided the building wall containing the garage door shall
not extend past the building wall containing the dwelling;
5. Except as authorized as part of a cluster development, no duplex shall be permitted
on a lot adjoining another lot containing a duplex. This restriction shall only apply to
lots that share a common side property line.
6. Trim with a minimum depth of three-quarters inch and a minimum width of three and
one-half inches shall be used to mark rooflines, windows, and doors.
J. Horizontally Attached Dwellings and Small Multiunit Buildings.
1. Except as authorized as part of a cluster development, horizontally attached dwellings
and small multiunit buildings may only be permitted on lots within 1,320 feet (travel
distance) of a school, park, bus route, or commercially zoned parcel;
2. Buildings shall be designed by a licensed architect and detailed elevation drawings
shall be provided with the conditional use permit application;
3. For horizontally attached dwellings, each unit shall have frontage on a public or
private street and shall have its own exterior entrance. Each unit's primary exterior
entrance shall face the street and direct pedestrian access to the street shall be
provided;
4. Building entrances facing the street shall incorporate a covered porch or landing with
a minimum area of 20 square feet and a minimum depth of three feet;
5. A consolidated garbage and recycling area shall be provided and shall be screened
from view in accordance with the applicable landscaping standard;
6. The maximum building length shall not exceed 100 feet;
7. Except as authorized as part of a cluster development, buildings shall be limited to
two floors or stories;
8. No more than four horizontally attached dwellings shall be permitted in a single
building;
9. Horizontally attached units shall incorporate design features that clearly identify each
dwelling unit as individual residences such as a change in materials, color,
articulation, rooflines, gable orientation, or other similar architectural techniques;
10. Each building shall include architectural design elements, materials, and features that
break up the mass of the building and provide greater compatibility with the scale and
appearance of surrounding detached residential structures. At a minimum buildings
must incorporate at least three of the following design elements:
a. Modulations along the front building wall at intervals of no more than 30 feet.
Each modulation shall step the building wall back or forward by at least four
feet;
b. Changes in the roofline at intervals of no more than 30 feet, such as variations
in roof pitch, overhangs, projections, or extended eaves;
c. Include at least two dormers with a minimum width of three feet;
d. Include at least two balconies on front building wall. Balconies shall have a
minimum depth of six feet between the building wall and the balcony railing;
e. For buildings with a second floor, reduce the area of the second floor so that its
area is less than that of the first floor. To receive credit for this design element,
the front building wall on the second floor shall be stepped back from the first
floor a minimum of two feet. The portion of second floor stepped back from the
first floor shall have a minimum width of eight feet. Uncovered, or covered
unenclosed, balconies can be used to receive credit for this design element
provided they satisfy the minimum dimensional requirements of this provision;
f. Include trim with a minimum depth of three-quarters inch and a minimum width
of three and one-half inches to mark rooflines, windows, and doors.
K. Accessory Dwelling Units. The following standards shall apply to accessory dwelling units
(ADUs):
1. Type. ADUs may be attached to the primary dwelling or be located in an accessory
building;
2. Number. One accessory dwelling unit is permitted for each primary dwelling;
3. Maximum Floor Area.
a. Detached: 1,000 square feet, exclusive of any area used as a garage, carport, or
covered patio. In all cases detached ADUs shall comply with the size limits
applicable to accessory buildings identified in this chapter;
b. Attached: 1,000 square feet or 30 percent of the floor area of the primary
dwelling, whichever is less; provided, that in all cases at least 500 square feet
may be permitted;
4. Design Standards.
a. Entrances and addressing: Separate entrances shall be provided for the primary
dwelling and the ADU. The ADU entrance shall be oriented so that it faces a
different direction than the entrance to the primary dwelling. ADUs shall be
assigned their own addresses.
b. Setbacks: Detached ADUs shall comply with the setback standards applicable
to accessory buildings identified in this chapter.
c. Access: Direct pedestrian access shall be provided between the ADU and a
street or alley;
5. Tenure and Ownership. The ADU must be located on the same lot as the primary
dwelling it is associated with and may not be separately sold.
L. Nonresidential Uses. The following standards shall apply to schools, meeting facilities, and
commercial day care centers, and other nonresidential uses other than utilities:
1. Schools, meeting facilities, and commercial day care centers shall be located on a
corner lot and adjoin an arterial street;
2. The total building footprint shall not exceed 2,500 square feet;
3. Parking areas shall not be located between the building and the street and shall be
completely screened from view with landscaping and fencing;
4. Outdoor play areas shall be screened from adjacent streets and residences with
landscaping and fencing;
5. The lot on which the nonresidential use will be located shall have an area of at least
10,000 square feet;
6. Flat roofs are prohibited. Roofs shall have a pitch of no less than 4:12;
7. The primary exterior entrance shall face the street and direct pedestrian access shall
be provided between the entrance and the street.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.100 Development standards.
A. Lot Area and Dimension. The following requirements shall apply to land divisions and
boundary line adjustments in the RD zones. Small lot and cluster developments shall be
subject to the applicable standards in this chapter.
1. Minimum Lot Area.
a. RD-1: 10,000 square feet.
b. RD-2: 6,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: 30 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth: 80 feet.
B. Minimum Setback Requirements.
1. Front: 17 feet.
2. Street side: 17 feet.
3. Side: five feet. Provided, that the total of the two side setbacks shall be at least 15
feet.
4. Rear: 20 feet.
5. Setback Exceptions.
a. Accessory buildings, small lots, and cluster developments shall be subject to the
setback requirements outlined in the applicable sections of this chapter;
b. When authorized pursuant to this chapter, no property line setback shall apply
to the common walls of zero lot line structures or horizontally attached
dwellings;
c. For lots adjoining streets on more than two sides, the street side setback shall be
five feet and the total of the two side setbacks need not be more than 10 feet;
d. All other buildings and structures: see BMC § 17.70.080.
6. Minimum Building Separation.
a. Primary structures: 10 feet, except that when authorized pursuant to this chapter,
no separation requirement shall apply between zero lot line structures or
horizontally attached dwellings that share a common wall.
b. Accessory structures: five feet.
C. Maximum Building and Impervious Surface Coverage.
1. Building coverage: 35 percent.
2. Impervious surface coverage: 40 percent.
3. For new plats building and impervious surface coverage limits may be averaged
across lots within the plat boundaries. When coverage limits are averaged restrictive
notes shall be included on the face of the plat identifying the coverage limits
applicable to each lot.
D. Maximum Building Height: 35 feet.
E. Accessory buildings and structures shall comply with all of the requirements of this chapter
except as follows:
1. Maximum height: 25 feet;
2. Maximum building footprint: 800 square feet; provided, that open uncovered decks
and patios shall not be subject to this limit and larger buildings may be permitted with
a conditional use permit;
3. Maximum rear yard coverage: Accessory buildings and structures shall not cover
more than 50 percent of the required rear yard setback area;
4. Minimum setback requirements:
a. Side: five feet.
b. Street side: 17 feet.
c. Rear: five feet.
d. Alley: zero feet.
F. Maximum Density. One primary residential building per lot excluding accessory dwelling
units. Consistent with the requirements of this chapter, an accessory dwelling unit may be
permitted on any lot in addition to a primary residential building. Cluster developments
shall be subject to the density limits identified in BMC § 17.15.105.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.105 Cluster developments.
Cluster developments may be permitted through a subdivision or short subdivision process. A
variety of building types and site layouts may be authorized and alternative standards for lot
width, lot depth, lot area, building and impervious surface coverage, and property line setbacks
may be employed. Cluster developments shall comply with all of the requirements of this chapter
except as follows:
A. Permitted housing types may include, but are not limited to, detached dwellings, duplex
dwellings, horizontally attached dwellings, multiunit buildings, cottage housing, zero lot
line development, or a combination of housing types; provided, that no structure or building
shall contain more than eight dwelling units.
B. The maximum allowable density of a cluster development may be averaged across the
entire site. The maximum permitted density shall not exceed the following limits.
Accessory dwelling units shall be excluded from maximum density calculations.
1. RD-1: seven dwellings per acre.
2. RD-2: 11 dwellings per acre.
C. When the building or impervious surface coverage of individual lots exceeds the
permissible limits for the zone in which the development is located, additional open space
areas shall be set aside so that the total coverage of development is consistent with the
coverage limits prescribed by the underlying zone.
D. The resulting subdivision or short subdivision design shall clearly retain a substantial area
of continuous, publicly accessible open space, wetlands, areas adjacent to wetlands, steep
slopes, geologically hazardous areas, wildlife habitat areas, or other critical areas. Open
space areas may also be used for nonstructural low impact development features, such as
bio-retention areas, which mimic natural environmental and hydrologic processes. All such
low impact development features shall be extensively landscaped using native vegetation.
The following minimum open space requirements shall apply to cluster developments:
1. Special management areas: 75 percent;
2. All other locations: 30 percent.
E. Restrictive plat notes shall be included identifying the approved building types and
densities.
F. Open space areas created through a cluster development shall be placed within separate
tracts.
G. Restrictive notes shall be included on the face of the plat, or short plat, limiting future use
and development of open space tracts to uses and developments that are consistent with the
intended purpose of the open space tracts.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.110 Residential small lot.
Residential small lots may be created in any RD zone through a subdivision or short subdivision
process. Small lot developments shall comply with all of the requirements of this chapter except
as follows:
A. Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet.
B. Maximum height limit: 25 feet.
C. Minimum roof pitch:
1. Structures with finished living space on only one floor shall have a minimum roof
pitch of 4:12.
2. Structures with finished living space on more than one floor shall have a minimum
roof pitch of 12:12.
D. Maximum building footprint: 800 square feet, excluding bay windows and uncovered
decks, patios, and balconies.
E. Maximum interior floor area: 1,000 square feet, excluding garages, carports, and covered
patios or decks.
F. Setback Requirements.
1. Front:
a. For lots with no alley access or where curb cuts are permitted: 17 feet.
b. For lots with alley access or where curb cuts are prohibited by plat notes: 10
feet.
2. Street side: 10 feet.
3. Rear: 10 feet.
4. Side: five feet.
G. Maximum building coverage: 45 percent.
H. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 60 percent.
I. Small lot subdivisions and short subdivisions shall include restrictive plat notes identifying
the requirements of this section.
J. Maximum density: One primary residential building per lot.
K. Accessory dwellings shall not be permitted on a lot created through the small lot
development process.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.15.120 Cottage housing.
Reserved.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)