17.25.010 Title.
This chapter shall be called "RA-2 Residential Attached Zone."
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.25.020 Application.
This chapter shall apply to all uses and developments in areas designated RA-2.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.25.030 Purpose.
The RA-2 zone is intended to implement the RA comprehensive plan designation by
accommodating a variety of larger scale residential buildings such as multiunit buildings,
including apartments and condominiums, townhomes, duplexes, and related accessory uses.
Other uses may be permitted in limited circumstances when consistent with the goals and
policies of the comprehensive plan. The RA-2 zone permits more intensive development than
the RA-1 zone and is generally applied to areas that adjoin a detached residential zone where
commercial development would not be appropriate due to a lack of traffic, visibility, or
inadequate infrastructure.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.25.040 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters35.63A, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW
and other applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.25.050 Permitted primary uses.
Buildings, structures, and lots in the RA-2 zone shall only be used for the following, unless
otherwise provided for in this title:
A. Detached dwellings;
B. Duplex dwellings;
C. Horizontally attached dwellings;
D. Multiunit buildings, all sizes;
E. Boarding houses, all sizes;
F. Commercial child day care centers, all sizes;
G. Small utilities;
H. Small private schools;
I. Small meeting facilities;
J. Small nursing homes.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.25.060 Permitted accessory uses.
The following buildings, structures, and uses are permitted accessory uses in the RA-2 zone.
Accessory uses shall only be permitted when associated with, and incidental and subordinate to,
a legally established primary use.
A. Normal Residential Appurtenances. The following uses and structures may be authorized
as an accessory use in conjunction with a dwelling, multiunit building, or residential
development: garages, recreation or exercise facilities, community room, manager's office,
storage shed, noncommercial gardens and greenhouses, swimming pools, laundry rooms
and facilities, decks, patios, driveways, on-site utilities and utility connections, fences, and
solar panels;
B. Keeping of not more than six household pets, four of which may be dogs, kept in the home.
This limit shall not include birds, fish or suckling young of pets;
C. Family day care services;
D. Foster family care services;
E. Telecommunication mini facility, subject to the following requirements:
1. The mini facility may be located on buildings and structures; provided, that the
immediate interior wall or ceiling adjacent to the facility is not a designated
residential space.
2. The mini facility shall be exempt from design review if the antenna and related
components are the same color as the existing building, pole or support structure on
which it is proposed to be located.
3. The shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic equipment shall be contained
wholly within a building or structure, or otherwise appropriately concealed,
camouflaged or located underground.
4. Mini facilities shall comply with the height limitation specified for all zones except
as follows: Omnidirectional antennas may exceed the height limitation by 10 feet, or
in the case of nonconforming structures the antennas may extend 10 feet above the
existing structure. Panel antennas may exceed the height limitation if affixed to the
side of an existing nonconforming building and blends in architecturally with the
building. Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be
considered to be an expansion of the nonconforming structure;
F. Parking facilities.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.25.070 Conditional uses.
The following uses shall require a conditional use permit:
A. Large meeting facilities;
B. Large private schools;
C. Medium utilities;
D. Professional offices;
E. Personal services;
F. Specialized instruction;
G. Large nursing homes.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.25.080 General use regulations.
A. Rural agricultural uses are not permitted.
B. No trailer, recreational vehicle, boat, camping trailer, fifth wheel, camper, van, car, or other
similar type of mobile unit that is not a permanent structure attached to the ground, shall be
used as a place of habitation or as a dwelling. Only site-built structures which comply with
all applicable building code requirements and manufactured or modular homes which meet
applicable state or federal standards for use as a dwelling unit may be used as a place of
habitation or as a dwelling.
C. Junk storage is only permitted outdoors when completely surrounded by a solid, site-
obscuring fence and not visible from an adjoining street or public right-of-way. Outdoor
storage shall also be subject to the following additional restrictions and requirements:
1. Litter, trash, used appliances, used interior furnishings and discarded exterior
furnishings and similar items are prohibited outdoors regardless of location.
2. Junk storage is further limited to piled used lumber, yard cleanup equipment and
similar types of items; it is not intended to include the storage of any items that would
be classified as a nuisance under chapter 8.12 BMC.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.25.090 Design standards.
A. Parking Facilities and Access.
1. Where alley access is available, off-street parking spaces and garages shall be
accessed from the alley and no curb cuts shall be permitted. This requirement shall
apply to all land divisions, the construction of new homes and accessory buildings,
and requests for new curb cuts.
2. Parking shall not be located between the building and the street. This restriction shall
not apply to driveways serving detached dwellings on individual lots or duplexes and
townhomes in developments of eight units or less.
B. Heat pumps and other mechanical equipment shall be located at least 10 feet from any
property line adjoining another residential development or dwelling and all equipment shall
be equipped with a noise-baffling screen so there is no audible sound at the property line.
All such equipment shall be fully screened from view using landscaping or fencing.
Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from view.
C. The following exterior finishes and materials shall be prohibited:
1. Vinyl siding;
2. T-111 plywood;
3. Exterior insulation finishing system (EIFS).
D. New subdivisions or developments that will result in 40 or more lots or dwellings shall
include a common open space area for outdoor recreation.
E. Detached Dwellings. Detached dwellings shall only be permitted in the following
circumstances:
1. On existing lots that have an area of 4,000 square feet or less;
2. The construction of two or more detached dwellings on an existing lot provided the
resulting density is at least one unit per 4,000 square feet;
3. In a cottage development with a gross density of at least 15 units per acre;
4. As part of a development with a mix of building types that has a gross density of at
least 15 units per acre.
F. Multiunit and Horizontally Attached Dwellings.
1. Large multiunit buildings and residential buildings in any development that includes
more than eight dwellings shall be designed by a licensed architect and detailed
elevation drawings shall be provided with the land use permit application.
2. Large multiunit buildings and residential buildings in any development that includes
more than eight dwellings shall have frontage on a public or private street. The
primary entrance for each building shall face the street and direct pedestrian access
shall be provided between the entrance and the street.
3. For horizontally attached dwellings, each unit shall have its own exterior entrance and
a direct pedestrian connection shall be provided between the entrance and the nearest
street. For developments that include more than eight units, each unit shall have
frontage on a public or private street and the primary entrance to each unit shall face
the street.
4. Primary building entrances shall incorporate a covered porch or landing with a
minimum area of 20 square feet and a minimum depth of three feet.
5. A consolidated garbage and recycling area shall be provided and shall be screened
from view in accordance with the applicable landscaping standard.
6. The maximum building length shall not exceed 180 feet.
7. Street facing facades of large multiunit buildings shall incorporate modulations at
intervals of 60 feet or less as follows:
a. Each modulation shall have a minimum width of 15 feet and a minimum depth
of six feet;
b. Balconies can be used to meet a portion of this requirement provided each
balcony has an area of at least 80 square feet and a depth of at least six feet.
8. For the purpose of breaking up the vertical mass of buildings, the first floor of a
multistory building shall be distinguished from the upper floors through the use of at
least one of the following design elements:
a. Change in materials;
b. Change in color;
c. Molding or other horizontally distinguishing transition trim, treatment, or
embellishment.
9. Each building shall include architectural design elements or materials intended to
break up the mass of the building and provide greater compatibility with the scale and
appearance of surrounding residential structures. At a minimum all buildings must
incorporate at least two of the following design elements:
a. Changes in the roofline at intervals of no more than 30 feet, such as variations
in roof pitch, height, overhangs, projections, or extended eaves;
b. Include at least two dormers with a minimum width of three feet;
c. Include at least two balconies on the front facade. Balconies shall have a
minimum depth of six feet between the building wall and the balcony railing;
d. For buildings with more than one floor, reduce the area of the upper floor so that
its area is less than that of the first floor. To receive credit for this design
element, the front building wall on the upper floor shall be stepped back from
the first floor a minimum of two feet. The portion of upper floor stepped back
from the first floor shall have a minimum width of eight feet. Uncovered, or
covered unenclosed, balconies can be used to receive credit for this design
element provided they satisfy the minimum dimensional requirements of this
provision.
10. Transition Areas. For developments that abut property zoned RD the following
standards shall apply:
a. All residential buildings shall be set back at least 20 feet from parcels zoned RD.
Any portion of a building higher than 25 feet or containing more than two stories
shall be set back at least 40 feet from parcels zoned RD.
b. Balconies that face a parcel zoned RD shall be faced with a material such as
frosted or opaque glass to provide visual privacy to neighboring properties.
c. Parking spaces and access roads shall not be located within 20 feet of a parcel
zoned RD.
d. A landscaped buffer shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 17.81 BMC.
G. Nonresidential Uses.
1. Nonresidential uses shall have frontage on a public street. The primary exterior
entrance providing access to the nonresidential uses shall face the street and direct
pedestrian access to the street shall be provided;
2. Schools, meeting facilities, and commercial day care centers shall be located on a
corner lot;
3. Professional offices and personal service establishments shall have frontage on a
public street;
4. The total floor area of any single building devoted to a nonresidential use shall not
exceed 2,500 square feet, provided this restriction shall not apply to residential
accessory uses such as community rooms, gyms, pools, or leasing offices;
5. Parking areas shall not be located between the building and the street and shall be
completely screened from view with landscaping and fencing;
6. Outdoor play areas shall be screened from adjacent streets and residences with
landscaping and fencing;
7. Flat roofs are prohibited. Roofs shall have a pitch of no less than 4:12;
H. Manufactured Homes. Manufactured homes may be placed on any lot in an RA-2 zone
where detached dwellings are permitted and regulated in accordance with the same
standards and requirements applicable to site-built detached homes, except that the
following additional regulations shall apply. These standards and requirements do not
apply to legally established, nonconforming manufactured homes or manufactured homes
placed within a manufactured home park.
1. The manufactured home shall be set upon a permanent foundation, as specified by the
manufacturer, and the space between the bottom of the home and the ground shall be
enclosed by concrete or an approved concrete product which may be either load
bearing or decorative;
2. The manufactured home shall have been originally constructed with and shall now
have a composition or wood shake or shingle, coated metal, or similar roof of nominal
3:12 pitch;
3. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding similar in appearance to siding
materials commonly used on conventional site-built Uniform Building Code single-
family residences;
4. The placement of the manufactured home shall be consistent with all other regulatory
requirements generally;
5. Manufactured homes shall comply with all of the regulatory requirements and permit
processing procedures identified in the chapter for site-built detached homes.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.25.100 Development standards.
A. Lot Area and Dimension. The following requirements shall apply to land divisions and
boundary line adjustments in the RA-2 zone except that cluster developments shall be
subject to the standards in BMC § 17.20.105.
1. Minimum lot area: 1,500 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: 30 feet, except that a minimum lot width of 15 feet may be
authorized as follows:
a. For lots with alley access or where curb cuts are prohibited by plat notes;
b. Infill development involving the establishment of up to four horizontally
attached dwellings on an existing lot.
3. Minimum lot depth: 60 feet.
B. Minimum Setback Requirements.
1. Front: 10 feet.
2. Street side: 10 feet.
3. Side: none.
4. Rear: none.
C. Minimum Building Separation.
1. Primary structures: 30 feet.
2. Accessory structures: 10 feet.
3. Exceptions: When authorized pursuant to this chapter no separation requirement shall
apply between zero lot line structures or horizontally attached dwellings that share a
common wall.
D. Maximum building and impervious surface coverage: 70 percent.
E. Maximum building height: 45 feet.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023; Formerly 17.25.090)

17.25.110 Cottage housing.
Reserved.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)