17.85.010 Title.
This chapter shall be called "Access and Parking."
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.020 Application.
The standards of this section shall apply to all new uses, structures, and developments, and to the
expansion or modification of existing uses, structures and developments.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.030 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for access and parking as follows:
A. Provide adequate, safe, and convenient access for drivers, pedestrians, cyclists, and transit
users;
B. Ensure accessibility by people of all ages and physical abilities;
C. Promote development patterns that are accessible and convenient while minimizing traffic,
parking, stormwater, and other impacts;
D. Ensure that each new development contributes to, and functions as part of, an
interconnected and coherent overall transportation system;
E. Promote flexible development patterns that can accommodate future changes and
transportation needs.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.040 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters35A.63, 36.70A, 36.70B RCW and
other applicable laws.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.050 General.
A. Access and parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
1. All new or modified developments, buildings, uses, or structures shall be consistent
with the provisions of this chapter.
2. All new or modified parking areas, driveways, drive aisles, pedestrian access paths,
private streets, and similar improvements shall be consistent with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Exceptions.
1. Landmark Structures. For uses in a landmark structure the number of required parking
spaces may be reduced or waived based on the following criteria:
a. A survey may be required of on- and off-street parking availability.
b. A determination that there is no feasible way to meet parking requirements on
the lot.
c. Consideration of the types and scale of uses proposed or practical in the
landmark structure and the controls imposed by the landmark designation.
2. Existing Development. Except in the RD and RA zones, additional parking spaces
shall not be required for the expansion of existing uses, or when changing uses, unless
the expansion or change would have the effect of increasing the number of required
parking spaces by more than 10 percent or five spaces, whichever is greater.
3. On-Street Parking. On-street parking spaces abutting a development site may be used
to meet the requirements of this chapter except as follows:
a. Spaces that are not available, or will not be available, due to roadway design,
right-of-way constraints, or future plans shall not be included; and
b. Applicants may be required to provide a parking survey prepared by a qualified
professional demonstrating that adequate on-street parking is reasonably
available.
C. Exceptions, Downtown Priority Development Area.
1. No parking shall be required for new uses in existing structures, or when existing
structures are remodeled.
2. For new structures or when an existing structure is expanded, no parking shall be
required for the first 2,500 square feet of nonresidential floor space or for the first
four dwellings.
3. No parking shall be required for public facilities or commercial child day care centers.
D. Tandem Parking. Off-street parking for dwellings may be provided as tandem parking.
E. Parking and loading areas shall have legal access to a public street or alley. When alley
access is available parking areas shall be accessed from the alley.
F. "Parking area" includes parking spaces, drive aisles, and internal access streets.
G. Calculations. When calculating the number of required parking spaces fractions shall be
rounded down to the nearest whole number.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.060 Parking quantities.
A. The number of required parking spaces shall be determined for each principal use of the
land, building, or structure using Table 17.85.060 and by applying any applicable
deductions or exemptions. For uses not specifically identified in this chapter, parking shall
be provided as specified for the use which, in the opinion of the director, is most similar to
the use under consideration. When, in the opinion of the director, no comparable use is
listed, the number of required parking spaces shall be determined by applying the
provisions of subsection (C) of this section (Alterations and Unlisted Uses).
B. The total number of parking spaces provided for any use or development shall not exceed
120 percent of the minimum requirements identified in this section, except:
1. This limitation shall only apply to uses and developments that require 20 or more
parking spaces; and
2. This limitation shall not apply to uses and developments where an alternative
maximum number is prescribed by Burlington Municipal Code; and
3. Additional spaces may be provided in excess of 120 percent of the minimum
requirement; provided, that any such spaces are located under a building with usable
floor space; and
4. This limitation may be waived for publicly owned parking lots; and
5. This limitation may be waived if a traffic and parking study is submitted showing the
need for additional parking. Such studies shall be prepared by a licensed engineer,
shall be consistent with, and integrated into, any other traffic study prepared for the
project, and shall be reviewed by the city engineer.
C. Alterations and Unlisted Uses. The following criteria shall be used to determine parking
requirements for unlisted uses that are not substantially similar to a listed use and to
evaluate requests to reduce the standard minimum parking quantity. In such cases the
director may require a parking study addressing the criteria below. When required, parking
studies shall be prepared by a licensed engineer and shall be consistent with, and integrated
into, any other traffic study prepared for the project and shall be reviewed by the city
engineer for consistency with established transportation engineering practices.
1. Trip generation and turnover;
2. Proximity to frequent transit service or a transit center;
3. The availability of alternative transportation services such as school buses or shuttle
vans;
4. The provision of on-site housing for students or employees;
5. Commute trip reduction measures implemented by the agency, business, or facility
operator;
6. The extent to which the development will provide enhanced pedestrian amenities and
bicycle facilities;
7. The intensity of development and mix of uses within 1,320 feet of the development
site;
8. The condition and availability of sidewalks and other pedestrian amenities within
1,320 feet of the development site.
D. Standard Reductions. The following parking spaces may be included in parking
calculations at a rate of 1.25:
1. Spaces located under a building;
2. Spaces located within 1,320 feet of transit center or bus stop;
3. Spaces for affordable housing developments.
Table 17.85.060 Parking Requirements
Minimum Parking Quantities
Use Requirement
Boarding House 1 space per dwelling plus one space for each
sleeping room
Commercial Entertainment and Indoor Active 1 space for every 350 square feet of activity
Recreation area
Commercial Child Day Care 1 space for every 10 children plus 1 loading/
unloading space for every 20 children
Craft Industries and Contractor Offices 1 space for every 1,000 square feet
Dwellings – Detached, Duplex, Horizontally Containing up to 2 bedrooms: 1 space per
Attached, and Small and Medium Multiunit dwelling
Buildings Containing 3 or more bedrooms: 2 spaces per
dwelling
Studio units: 1 space per dwelling
Containing between 1 and 2 bedrooms: 1.5
spaces per dwelling
Dwellings – Large Multiunit Buildings Containing 3 or more bedrooms: 2 spaces per
dwelling
Guest parking: 1 space for every 3 dwelling
units containing 1 or more bedrooms
Eating and Drinking Establishments Small: 1 space for every 500 square feet
Large: 1 space for every 200 square feet
Fueling Stations and Car Washes 1 space for every 2,000 square feet
Government Facilities *see BMC § 17.85.060(C)*
Healthcare Facilities and Veterinarians 1 space for every 350 square feet
Hospitals *see BMC § 17.85.060(C)*
Hotels and Transient Accommodations 1 space for each sleeping room or suite
Industrial, Vehicle Repair, and Wrecking 1 space for every 2,000 square feet
Yards
Kennel (Pet Boarding, Overnight) 1 space for every 2,000 square feet
Lumberyards, Nurseries, and Garden Supply 1 space for every 2,000 square feet
Meeting Facilities and Theaters 1 space for every 8 fixed seats or 1 space for
every 100 square feet of auditorium or
spectator area without fixed seats
Table 17.85.060 Parking Requirements
Minimum Parking Quantities
Use Requirement
Nursing Homes 1 space for every 6 beds plus 2 spaces for
every 2 employees expected to be on site
during peak staffing periods
Administrative: 1 space for every 1,000
Offices square feet
Customer Service: 1 space for every 350
square feet
Personal Services and Pet Boarding, Day Care 1 space for every 500 square feet
Personal Storage 1 space for every 30 units
Private Passenger Transportation Services 1 space for every 200 square feet
Private Schools *see BMC § 17.85.060(C)*
General consumer goods: 1 space for every
Retail 350 square feet
Major durables, furniture, and appliances: 1
space for every 2,000 square feet
Sales and Rental of Motorized Vehicles 1 space for every 2,000 square feet
Specialized Instruction 1 space for each faculty member and full time
employee plus 1 space for every 5 students in
attendance during peak periods
Bicycle Parking
Multiunit Residential Buildings, Medium 1 space for every 4 dwellings
Multiunit Residential Buildings, Large 1 outdoor space for every 20 dwellings plus 1
indoor space for every 4 dwellings
Retail 2 spaces plus 1 additional space for every
12,000 square feet
Eating and Drinking Establishments Small: 2 spaces
Large: 4 spaces
Offices 2 spaces per building plus 1 additional space
for every 5,000 square feet
Personal Services 2 spaces
Government Facilities *see BMC § 17.85.060(C)*
Private Schools *see BMC § 17.85.060(C)*
Commercial Child Day Care 2 spaces plus 1 additional space for every 4
vehicle parking spaces provided
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.070 Shared parking.
A. Shared Parking – General Provisions.
1. Shared parking shall be allowed between two or more uses to satisfy all or a portion
of the minimum off-street parking requirement of those uses as provided in
subsections (B) and (C) of this section.
2. Shared parking shall be allowed between different categories of uses or between uses
with different hours of operation, but not both.
3. A use for which an application is being made for shared parking shall be located
within 1,320 feet of the parking.
4. No reduction to the parking requirement shall be made if the proposed uses have
already received a reduction through the provisions for cooperative parking.
5. Parking reductions permitted through shared use of parking shall be determined as a
percentage of the minimum parking requirement as modified by any other reductions
permitted in BMC § 17.85.050 and 17.85.060.
6. An agreement providing for the shared use of parking, executed by the parties
involved, shall be filed with the director. Shared parking privileges shall continue in
effect only as long as the agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force. If the
agreement is no longer in force, then parking shall be provided as otherwise required
by this chapter.
B. Shared Parking for Different Categories of Use.
1. A business establishment may share parking according to only one of the following
subsections: subsection (B)(2), (3), or (4) of this section.
2. If an office use and a retail sales and service use shared parking, the parking
requirement for the retail sales and service use may be reduced by 20 percent;
provided, that the reduction shall not exceed the minimum parking requirement for
the office use.
3. If a residential use shares parking with a retail sales and service use other than lodging
uses, eating and drinking establishments or entertainment uses, the parking
requirement for the residential use may be reduced by 30 percent; provided, that the
reduction does not exceed the minimum parking requirement for the retail sales and
service use.
4. If an office and a residential use share off-street parking, the parking requirement for
the residential use may be reduced by 50 percent; provided, that the reduction shall
not exceed the minimum parking requirement for the office use.
C. Shared Parking for Uses With Different Hours of Operation.
1. For the purposes of this section, the following uses shall be considered daytime uses:
a. Customer service and administrative offices;
b. Retail sales and services, except eating and drinking establishments, lodging
uses, and entertainment uses;
c. Wholesale, storage and distribution uses;
d. Manufacturing uses; and
e. Other similar primarily daytime uses, when authorized by the community
development director or designee.
2. For the purposes of this section, the following uses shall be considered nighttime or
Sunday uses:
a. Auditoriums accessory to public or private schools;
b. Religious facilities;
c. Entertainment uses, such as theaters, bowling alleys, and dance halls;
d. Eating and drinking establishments;
e. Lodging uses; and
f. Other similar primarily nighttime or Sunday uses, when authorized by the
community development director or designee.
3. Up to 90 percent of the parking required for a daytime use may be supplied by the
off-street parking provided by a nighttime or Sunday use and vice-versa, when
authorized by the director, except that this may be increased to 100 percent when the
nighttime or Sunday use is a religious facility.
4. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating
hours of the uses for which the sharing of parking is proposed.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.080 Cooperative parking.
A. Cooperative parking shall be permitted between two or more business establishments
which are commercial uses according to the provisions of this section.
B. Up to a 20 percent reduction in the total number of required parking spaces for four or more
separate business establishments, 15 percent reduction for three business establishments,
and a 10 percent reduction for two commercial uses may be authorized by the director
under the following conditions:
1. No reductions to the parking requirement shall be made if the proposed business
establishments have already received a reduction through the provisions for shared
parking.
2. The business establishments for which the application is being made for cooperative
parking shall be located within 1,320 feet of the parking.
3. The reductions to parking permitted through cooperative parking shall be determined
as a percentage of the minimum parking requirement as modified by any reductions
permitted by BMC § 17.85.050, 17.85.060 and this section.
4. An agreement providing for the cooperative use of parking shall be filed with the
director when the facility or area is established as cooperative parking. Cooperative
parking privileges shall continue in effect only as long as the agreement to use the
cooperative parking remains in force. If the agreement is no longer in force, then
parking shall be provided as otherwise required by this chapter. New business
establishments seeking to meet parking requirements by becoming part of an existing
cooperative arrangement shall provide the director with an amendment to the
agreement stating their inclusion in the cooperative parking facility or area.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.090 Reserved.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.100 Reserved.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.105 Construction standards.
A. All parking areas, driveways, drive aisles, private streets, and outdoor storage and sales lots
shall be paved with permeable pavement, asphalt concrete, or cement concrete pavement.
All asphalt pavement sections shall have a minimum pavement section consisting of two
inches of Class "B" asphalt concrete, two inches of five-eighths-inch minus crushed rock,
and six inches of Class "A" bank run gravel or approved equal. All permeable paving,
concrete pavement sections, or any alternative asphalt pavement sections shall be designed
to support the post development traffic loads anticipated due to the intended use.
B. Parking and circulation areas, access roads, and drive aisles shall be designed and
constructed with LID features such as permeable pavement, rain gardens, or bio-retention
areas unless demonstrated to be infeasible through an engineering analysis.
C. In determining the feasibility of LID features, an engineering analysis shall be submitted
and reviewed by the city engineer. This analysis should consider site characteristics such
as soil and ground water conditions, and anticipated traffic volumes. The analysis should
be consistent with the Department of Ecology's "Stormwater Manual for Western
Washington" and the design and site evaluation guidance in the Puget Sound Partnership's
"Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound." The engineering
analysis requirement identified above may be waived by the city engineer for simple small-
scale projects when the feasibility of permeable pavement can be easily determined without
the need for additional information or analysis; provided, that an engineering analysis shall
be submitted for all projects involving 20 or more parking spaces.
D. All parking and circulation areas, access roads, and drive aisles shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with any applicable requirements in BMC Title 14.
E. Parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only, with no sales, unless permitted
elsewhere by this title, dead storage, repair work, or dismantling of any kind.
F. Outdoor sales areas and storage yards shall be paved and landscaped in accordance with
this title.
G. Lighting. See chapter 17.70 BMC.
H. Stormwater shall be managed in accordance with chapter 14.05 BMC and LID measures
shall be provided consistent with the requirements of this chapter and chapter 17.70 BMC.
I. Access to public streets shall be approved by the public works department consistent with
the requirements of BMC Title 12.
J. Driveways and parking stalls shall be clearly marked.
K. Landscaping. See chapter 17.81 BMC.
L. Driveways and parking spaces for detached, duplex, and horizontally attached dwellings
shall be paved with permeable pavement, asphalt, or concrete and may utilize a two track
design to minimize impervious surface coverage.
M. The installation of paving and impervious surfaces shall be limited to the minimum amount
necessary to support a permitted use or development.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.110 Location and screening standards.
A. Required off-street parking shall be located on the same parcel as the uses served unless
off-site parking is authorized in compliance with this chapter. Parking shall be located on
each site in compliance with the parking layer requirements illustrated below:
1. First Layer. The area between the frontage line and the facade line.
2. Second Layer. The area between the facade line and 20 feet from the facade. Note
that the second layer is not required on the secondary frontage.
3. Third Layer. That portion of the lot that is neither the first layer nor the second layer.
Generally this portion of the lot extends to an alley or an interior lot line.
B. Surface Parking Location and Screening. The following requirements shall apply in
addition to any other parking, landscaping, setback, or site design requirements:
1. Parking area and service yards must be screened from adjoining residences.
2. Where alley access is available, parking shall be located off the alley and no curb cuts
shall be permitted for residential uses.
3. Parking located in the setback in front of the building shall be screened and
landscaped with a streetscreen as defined in BMC § 17.81.105.
4. Parking area illumination shall be directed away from residential uses.
5. Downtown special planning area including surface parking shall be located in the
third layer and masked by a streetscreen or building, except that driveways and aprons
may be located in the first or second layer.
6. Burlington Boulevard Corridor. Surface parking may be located in the first, second or
third layer and masked by a streetscreen if the street frontage is not fully occupied by
buildings.
C. Repealed by Ord. 1933.
D. Off-Site Parking. Off-site parking areas may be used to meet the requirements of this
chapter provided the off-site parking area is located within 1,320 feet of the development
site and is either in common ownership or encumbered by an easement or other formal
agreement. Off-site parking areas shall be connected to the development site with a
continuous pedestrian path in the form of a concrete sidewalk. Marked crosswalks shall be
provided at all intersections.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.115 Design standards.
A. Dimensions and Site Layout. The standards in this section shall apply to all outdoor parking
areas. Parking areas located beneath a building shall be subject only to the requirements for
minimum stall and aisle dimensions (subsection (D) of this section).
1. Parking stalls and drive aisles shall be consistent with the dimensions specified in
Figure A.
2. Except when adjacent to a building frontage or the perimeter of a site, parking rows
and columns shall have a maximum length of 200 feet.
3. Drive aisles may be used to provide direct access to individual parking rows and
should be connected to a public or private street.
B. Up to 30 percent of the parking spaces required by this chapter may be compact spaces,
except in the downtown special planning area where all of the required parking spaces may
be compact.
C. Off-street parking lots shall comply with the barrier-free parking space requirements of the
International Building Code.
D. The minimum parking space and aisle dimensions for the most common parking angles are
shown on Figure A. For parking angles other than those shown on Figure A, the minimum
parking space and aisle dimensions shall be determined by the community development
director and shall be proportional to the dimensions shown below.
Figure A
Minimum Parking Stall and Aisle Dimensions
Parking Stall Curb Stall Aisle Width Unit Depth
Angle Width Length Depth 1-Way 2-Way 1-Way 2-Way
0° 8.0 20.0 8.0 10.0 20.0 N/A N/A
30° 8.0* 16.0* 15.0* 10.0 20.0 ** **
Min. 8.5 17.0 16.5 10.0 20.0 43.0 53.0
45° 8.0* 11.5* 17.0* 12.0 20.0 ** **
Min. 8.5 12.0 19.0 12.0 20.0 50.0 58.0
60° 8.0* 9.5* 18.0* 18.0 20.0 ** **
Min. 8.5 10.0 20.0 18.0 20.0 58.0 60.0
90° 8.0* 8.0* 15.0* 23.0 23.0 ** **
Min. 8.5 8.5 17.0 23.0 23.0 63.0 63.0
Notes:
* For use with compact stalls only.
** Variable with compact and standard combinations.
E. Any parking spaces abutting a landscaped area on the driver or passenger side of the
vehicle shall provide an additional 18 inches above the minimum space width requirement
to provide a place to step other than in the landscaped area. The additional width shall be
separated from the adjacent parking space by a parking space division stripe. The parking
space depth may be reduced when vehicles overhang a walkway under the following
conditions:
1. Wheel stops or curbs are installed.
2. The remaining walkway provides a minimum of 60 inches of unimpeded passageway
for pedestrians.
3. The amount of space depth reduction is limited to a maximum of one and one-half
feet for standard parking spaces and one and one-half feet for compact spaces
including the wheel stop or curb.
F. Driveways may cross required setbacks or landscaped areas in order to provide access
between the off-street parking facilities and the street, provided no more than 10 percent of
the required landscaping or setback area is displaced by the driveway. Driveways may be
used for parking when serving single detached dwellings but shall not be considered for
purposes of calculating required parking.
G. Parking areas shall be illuminated in accordance with the city's outdoor lighting standards
(chapter 17.70 BMC). Pedestrian-scale lighting shall be provided along all pedestrian paths
and at all crosswalks.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.120 Pedestrian circulation and access.
A. General. All uses shall provide pedestrian access to the site. Pedestrian access shall be
provided at all pedestrian arrival points for the development including the property edges,
adjacent lots, abutting street intersections and mid-block crosswalks, transit stops, and at
least every 100 feet of consecutive street frontage. Pedestrian access shall be located as
follows:
1. Adjacent Streets and Property Edges. Access at property edges and to adjacent lots
shall be coordinated with existing development to provide logical circulation patterns
between developments.
a. Pedestrian connections shall be provided along adjacent street frontages at
intervals of 100 feet or less;
b. Connections shall be provided to existing or planned transit stops;
c. Pedestrian paths shall be connected to existing pedestrian paths on adjacent sites
whenever feasible;
d. For development sites that abut properties that are vacant or likely to redevelop,
pedestrian paths should be extended to the property or site boundaries to support
future development.
B. Residential Developments. Pedestrian access shall be provided to allow pedestrian access
from within the development and from adjacent developments to activity centers, parks,
common tracts, open space areas, schools or other public facilities, transit stops and public
streets. When dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs are used pedestrian access paths shall be
provided to allow direct links between streets and cul-de-sacs. For multi-unit residential
developments pedestrian access paths shall be provided to link buildings together.
C. Parking Areas. Pedestrian circulation shall be provided within all parking areas and
between parking areas and adjacent uses. The following standards are intended to create a
grid of interconnecting paths, minimize the distance parking lot users must travel from a
vehicle to a pedestrian path. The intent of these requirements is to create a grid of
interconnected pedestrian paths located at convenient intervals. Pedestrian paths shall be
provided within parking areas as follows. These requirements do not apply to parking areas
located under a building.
1. Parallel to Parking Rows. Pedestrian paths shall be provided parallel to parking rows
at intervals of every four parking rows, provided the distance between pedestrian
paths shall not exceed 200 feet.
2. Perpendicular to Parking Rows. Pedestrian paths shall be provided perpendicular to
parking rows at intervals of 200 feet or less.
D. Building Access. Pedestrian paths shall form a circulation system that minimizes conflicts
between pedestrians and vehicle traffic and provides direct and convenient access to all
buildings. Pedestrian access shall be provided as follows:
1. All developments containing more than one building shall provide pedestrian paths
between the principal entrances of each building.
2. Commercial and mixed use buildings shall provide pedestrian paths along all building
frontages that contain an entrance or abut a parking area. Building frontages
containing only service entrances, such as loading docks, that are not accessible to the
general public shall be exempt from this requirement.
3. For residential and industrial buildings, pedestrian paths shall connect the primary
building entrances to adjacent streets and pedestrian access paths.
4. Emergency exits shall be connected to the pedestrian access system.
E. Design Standards.
1. Pedestrian paths shall be physically separated from driveways and parking spaces by
landscaping, berms, barriers, grade separation or other means to protect pedestrians
from vehicular traffic. Unless an alternative method providing an equivalent level of
pedestrian safety and physical separation is approved, this requirement shall be met
by providing curbing and raised sidewalk.
2. Pedestrian paths shall be constructed using permeable pavement unless demonstrated
to be infeasible through an engineering analysis, in which case concrete or an
alternative hard surface approved by the city engineer shall be used. Pedestrian access
paths shall have a minimum unobstructed width of five feet except as follows:
a. Pedestrian paths that directly abut parking spaces shall have a minimum
unobstructed width of seven feet;
b. Pedestrian paths along the frontage of a building with a floor area greater than
10,000 square feet but less than 20,000 square feet shall have a minimum width
of 10 feet;
c. Pedestrian paths along the frontage of a building with a floor area of 20,000
square feet or more shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.
3. Pedestrian access paths shall comply with all applicable ADA and accessibility
requirements.
4. A crosswalk shall be required when a pedestrian path crosses a driveway, street, or a
paved area accessible to vehicles. Except where driveways or streets access a major
arterial the maximum crosswalk length, or distance between curbs, shall be 20 feet.
Crosswalks should generally be configured to provide a direct crossing perpendicular
to the direction of vehicle travel and shall be designated using paint unless an
alternative method is specified by Burlington Municipal Code or approved by the city
engineer.
5. If any parking space is more than 150 feet from the building entrance or principal on-
site destination, a stop sign and stop line or other pavement marking shall be required
at the end of every row of parking.
6. If any parking space is more than 200 feet from the building entrance or principal on-
site destination:
a. At least one sheltered rest area shall be provided; and
b. Raised crosswalks or speed bumps shall be located at all points where a
walkway crosses the lane of vehicle travel.
7. Where the building entrance is more than 250 feet from the public right-of-way, a
sheltered rest area may be required at the public street.
8. Sidewalks and walkways should be sloped to drain towards adjoining landscaping,
planting areas, or infiltration features.
9. Pedestrian access paths should avoid indirect or circuitous routes and should
generally be laid out parallel and perpendicular to the building entrances. When site
grades dictate an indirect routing to accommodate an ADA ramp an additional, direct
route shall be provided using stairs or steps if needed.
10. Required pedestrian paths along building frontages may be covered by awnings but
shall not be located under a building or between the building and a vertical support
element such as a pier, pillar, or post.
11. Lighting shall be provided consistent with the requirements of BMC § 17.70.105.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.125 Reserved.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.130 Reserved.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.135 Reserved.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.140 Design standards for private streets and roads.
Private streets and roads created to serve new development, including subdivisions, short
subdivisions, binding site plans, and commercial and industrial development, shall be subject to
the following standards and requirements:
A. For private streets that provide access to more than one lot, a road maintenance agreement
and access easement approved by the city engineer shall be recorded with Skagit County
auditor's office;
B. Street segments serving four dwelling units or less shall be at least 20 feet in width;
C. Streets and roads serving nonresidential development, more than four dwelling units, or
carrying a traffic volume of up to 250 average trips per day, whichever is less, shall be at
least 38 feet in width and shall include two driving lanes, one parking lane and sidewalks
along both sides of the street.
D. Streets and roads carrying a traffic volume of 250 average trips per day or more shall
comply with the design standards and specifications applicable to public streets and roads
in chapter 12.28 BMC;
E. Low impact development features such as bioretention areas, rain gardens, and permeable
paving shall be incorporated into the design and construction of all private streets and roads
unless demonstrated to be infeasible through an engineering analysis. In determining the
feasibility of such low impact development features, an engineering analysis shall be
submitted and reviewed by the city engineer. This analysis should consider site
characteristics such as soil and ground water conditions, and anticipated traffic volumes.
The analysis should be consistent with the Washington State Department of Ecology's
"Stormwater Manual for Western Washington" and the design and site evaluation guidance
in the Puget Sound Partnership's "Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual
for Puget Sound."
F. Streets shall be connected to streets on adjacent sites whenever possible. For development
sites that abut properties that are vacant or likely to redevelop streets should be extended to
the property or site boundaries to facilitate future development.
G. Construction. Private streets shall be paved and shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with any applicable construction or stormwater requirements identified in BMC
Title 14.
H. Lighting. Pedestrian-scale street lighting shall be provided and all lighting shall be
consistent with the city's outdoor lighting standards (chapter 17.70 BMC).
I. Fire Flow and Access. All streets shall comply with the applicable fire flow and access
requirements identified in chapter 15.08 BMC.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.85.150 Alternative street design standards.
As an alternative to the design requirements listed in BMC § 17.85.140, the city may authorize
the use of the following alternative design standards for private streets. The alternative design
standards in this section may only be used for streets serving residential developments comprised
primarily of detached, horizontally attached, small lot, or cottage housing.
A. Entrances. Entrances to a private street system shall be clearly delineated using signage and
other visual and tactile indicators, such as pavement markings, bollards, planters, boulders,
or restricted turning radiuses.
B. Paving and Curbs. The design shall incorporate a variety of paving materials to create a
varied surface that visually distinguishes the location of intersections, parking lanes,
crosswalks, and pedestrian paths.
C. Traffic Calming. Traffic calming measures, such as raised intersections, chicanes, on-street
parking areas, or extra street frontage landscaping shall be incorporated into the design.
The overall design should create a street environment that encourages traffic to move at, or
near, the speed of pedestrians.
D. Roadway Width. The standard roadway width for two-way traffic shall be 20 feet.
Narrower street widths may be approved consistent with applicable fire code requirements
and for one-way street segments.
E. Pedestrian Circulation. A pedestrian access path shall be provided along at least one side
of the street. The pedestrian access path shall be at least five feet in width, physically
separated from vehicle circulation areas with curbing, landscaping, or bollards, and shall
be paved with conventional or porous concrete. A separate pedestrian path shall not be
required for street segments less than 150 feet in length consistent with the following:
1. The street segment serves only the dwelling units adjoining it and does not function
as part of the street system, or the street segment is terminated in a dead end; and
2. The roadway surface contains an area delineated for pedestrian travel using a
contrasting paving material, such as concrete or stamped asphalt.
F. On-Street Parking. At least one on-street parking space shall be provided for every four
dwelling units in the development. On-street parking spaces may be grouped together and
configured as parallel, angled or parking pocket designs. On-street parking areas shall be
differentiated from adjacent travel lanes using painting, pavement markers, or contrasting
paving materials. On-street spaces shall be located within 400 feet of the dwellings they are
associated with.
G. Stormwater. Private streets shall be designed and constructed consistent with the
requirements of BMC Title 14 and shall incorporate LID features consistent with the
provisions of BMC § 17.85.140(E).
H. Street Maintenance Agreement. A street maintenance agreement must be approved by the
city engineer and recorded with the Skagit County auditor.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)