17.81.010 Title.
This chapter shall be called "Landscaping."
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.81.020 Application.
This chapter shall apply to all development, including but not limited to land use and building
permits, the maintenance, removal or alteration of any landscaping required under this chapter,
and the removal or alteration of significant trees.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.81.030 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
A. Improve the character and appearance of the city;
B. Manage stormwater, reduce erosion, provide areas for biofiltration, and maintain or restore
natural hydrologic processes;
C. Protect public health by providing shade and wind protection, reducing urban heat island
effects, improving air quality;
D. Reduce localized flooding and slow the movement of floodwaters;
E. Protect the quality of ground water, provide opportunities for ground water recharge, and
conserve water resources;
F. Provide buffers between incompatible uses and minimize aesthetic, noise, light, glare, and
privacy impacts;
G. Promote economic development by creating an aesthetically pleasing, safe, and
comfortable environment for residents, visitors, and businesses;
H. Provide wildlife habitat and promote biodiversity;
I. Implement the city's comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.81.040 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters35A.63 and 36.70A RCW and other
applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.81.050 Plans and review process.
A. Plans Required. Landscaping plans shall be required for all new development except:
1. The construction or modification of a detached dwelling or duplex on an existing lot;
2. The construction or modification of normal residential appurtenances and accessory
uses associated with an individual detached, duplex, or horizontally attached dwelling
unit;
3. Normal residential landscaping and gardening associated with an individual detached,
duplex, or horizontally attached dwelling unit;
4. The construction or modification of buildings and other improvements on a site where
the existing landscaping fully complies with this chapter and where the landscaping
will not be modified;
5. Simple small scale projects where little or no landscaping is required and where
compliance with the requirements of this chapter can be readily assured through
simple conditions of approval.
B. Landscape Architect Required. All landscaping plans shall be prepared by a landscape
architect licensed in the state of Washington. This requirement may be waived for simple
small scale projects where little or no landscaping is required.
C. Plan Requirements. Landscaping plans shall be drawn to scale and include the information
specified below.
1. The location of property boundaries, easements, and streets located on, or adjoining
the development site;
2. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures and site
improvements such as buildings, parking areas, utilities, stormwater improvements,
trash enclosures, and low impact development features;
3. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed landscaping areas, buffers
strips, fences, walls, and retaining walls;
4. The location, species, and approximate size of all proposed landscape plantings and
trees;
5. Identify and describe all non-plant landscaping materials such as gravel, stones, bark,
mulch, fountains, and ponds;
6. Tables demonstrating compliance with the minimum area and planting ratios
specified in this chapter;
7. Irrigation plans or drought-tolerating planting documentation;
8. The location of any existing significant trees and information on their protection and
retention;
9. Planting information describing the mature size of plants and trees, the size of plants
or trees at installation, and information on the coverage or spread of ground cover
plantings;
10. Instructions regarding planting methods, watering, or soil amendments necessary to
ensure the landscaping is adequately established and survives;
11. Plans for the removal of any noxious weeds or invasive species;
12. Any other information deemed necessary by the community development director for
purposes of demonstrating compliance with this chapter or any other provision of the
Burlington Municipal Code.
D. Review Process. Landscaping plans shall generally be reviewed in conjunction with the
associated land use permit. Where no land use permit is required the landscaping plan shall
be reviewed in conjunction with the underlying building or development permit. If no
permit is required the landscaping plan shall be processed as a Type I permit review in
accordance with the requirements of BMC Title 14A.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.81.060 General requirements.
A. Landscaping Materials.
1. Plants and trees shall be adapted to the local climate and soil conditions;
2. At least 50 percent of all plants and trees shall be native to the Puget Lowland region
of the Pacific Northwest and at least 25 percent of all required trees shall be
coniferous evergreens;
3. No artificial lawn or plants shall be permitted in landscaped areas or used to satisfy
the requirements of this chapter;
4. Bark, mulch, gravel, river-rock, and other nonvegetative material may only be used
in conjunction with landscaping to assist with the health and growth of plants and
trees. Nonvegetative material shall not be used as a substitute for vegetative ground
cover or otherwise used to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. Under no
circumstances shall nonvegetative material appear to dominate over plant material;
5. Species identified as noxious weeds or invasive species by the Washington State
Noxious Weed Control Board or other applicable authority are prohibited and shall
not be planted anywhere in the city of Burlington. When landscaping is required all
existing noxious weeds or invasive species shall be removed from the site and
properly disposed of;
6. Species should include a variety of seasonal colors, forms, and textures that contrast
or complement each other and a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs,
ground cover, and low-maintenance perennials. Preference should be given to species
that can be maintained in their natural form without significant pruning or care;
7. Species shall be selected, planted, and maintained to avoid conflicts with, or damage
to, streets, sidewalks, paths, above or below ground utilities, and other similar
improvements. When trees are planted within 10 feet of a sidewalk, pedestrian path,
or street root barriers shall be provided. Tree wells shall have sufficient depth and
dimensions to promote healthy root development and avoid damage to adjacent
improvements. At a minimum, trees shall be planted in a hole that measures at least
three times the diameter of the tree's root-ball.
B. Minimum Landscape Material Specifications. The following specifications shall apply to
the plants, trees, fences, walls, and other landscaping materials required by this section.
1. Deciduous trees shall have a clear trunk at least five feet above the ground and a
minimum caliper of at least two inches at the time of planting;
2. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of six feet at the time of planting;
3. Vine maples and other multi-stemmed trees shall have a minimum height of seven
feet at the time of planting;
4. Small shrubs shall have a minimum height of 12 inches with a one-gallon pot or ball-
and-burlap at the time of planting. Small shrubs have a mature height of three feet or
less;
5. Medium shrubs shall have a minimum height of two feet with a three-gallon pot or
ball-and-burlap at the time of planting. Medium shrubs have a mature height of more
than three feet but less than six feet;
6. Large shrubs shall have a minimum height of more than two feet with a five-gallon
pot or ball-and-burlap at the time of planting. Large shrubs have a mature height of
six feet or more;
7. Ground cover shall be provided using grass sod, or spreading ground cover in four-
inch pots planted at intervals of nine inches or less, or one-gallon pots planted at
intervals of 18 inches or less. In all cases ground cover plantings shall be sufficient to
achieve a uniform spread and 80 percent cover of the planting area within two years
of installation;
8. Solid site-obscuring fences shall be constructed of wood and painted or stained a dark
natural color. Chain link (cyclone) fencing may also be used provided it is treated
with a dark, natural colored coating (such as black or green) and matching privacy
slats are used. Other materials may be authorized provided they are consistent with
the objective of creating a solid site-obscuring fence that is visually inconspicuous,
blends in with surrounding vegetation, and complements the architecture of
surrounding buildings and developments.
C. Minimum Area Requirements. The following requirements specify the minimum
percentage of the gross site area which must be landscaped:
Table 17.81.060.C-1
Required Percentage of Gross Site
Zoning Classification Area
Residential (RD and RA) 15%
Mixed Use Residential (MUR-1 and MUR-2) 15%
Mixed Use Commercial (MUC-1 and MUC-2) 15%
Public Facilities and Transportation (PFT-1) 15%
Public Facilities and Transportation (PFT-2) 10%
Commercial Industrial (CI-1 and CI-2) 10%
1. Downtown. For sites located in the downtown priority development area with
frontage on Fairhaven Avenue the minimum gross site area requirement may be
reduced to five percent as minimally necessary to accommodate buildings, walkways,
parking, or service areas provided all remaining portions of the site are fully
landscaped.
2. Utilities and Transportation. The minimum gross site area requirements identified
above shall not apply to street rights-of-way or other similar linear transportation
improvements located in the PFT zone. Utility lines, substations, and pump stations
shall also be exempt from the gross site area requirements provided all other
applicable requirements of this chapter, such as screening, buffers, and perimeter
landscaping, are met.
D. Irrigation. All new landscaping shall either utilize a drought-tolerant landscaping plan, an
automatic irrigation system, or an approved alternative irrigation system as follows:
1. Automatic Irrigation Systems. Except as explicitly authorized by this section an
automatic irrigation system shall be provided. The irrigation system shall provide
sufficient coverage to irrigate all of the required landscaping areas. Irrigation system
plans and specifications shall be included in the landscaping plans required by this
chapter.
2. Drought-Tolerant Landscaping Plans. A drought-tolerant landscaping plan may be
used as an alternative to an automatic irrigation system. When a drought-tolerant
landscaping plan is proposed the landscape architect shall provide a written statement
documenting that the landscaping can be expected to survive in the absence of regular
watering. The landscape architect shall also document that suitable drought-tolerant
species have been prescribed and identify any planting methods, soil amendments, or
temporary irrigation measures necessary to ensure the landscaping is fully established
and self-sustaining. Drought-tolerant landscaping plans must be prepared by a
licensed landscape architect.
3. Alternative Irrigation Methods. For simple small scale projects with minimal
landscaping requirements, the community development director may authorize the
use of hand watering to meet the irrigation requirements of this chapter. In such cases
hose bibs shall be provided within 50 feet of all required landscaping areas.
E. Stormwater Management.
1. Stormwater facilities and low impact development (LID) features landscaped in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter may be used to meet any applicable
landscaping requirements.
2. To the greatest extent possible the planting areas required by this chapter shall be used
as stormwater infiltration areas or LID features.
3. Low impact development features and planting areas used to manage stormwater shall
be designed and constructed consistent with the Washington State Department of
Ecology's "Stormwater Manual for Western Washington" and the Puget Sound
Partnership's "Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for the Puget
Sound."
4. When trees or plants will be located within, or adjacent to, an infiltration area or LID
feature the landscape architect shall submit evidence that they have coordinated with
the engineer responsible for the on-site stormwater management system. Based on
information provided by the stormwater engineer the landscape architect shall:
a. Specify tree and plant species suitable for the hydrologic and soil conditions
anticipated in the planning area; and
b. Specify tree and plant species that will not detrimentally affect the ability of the
planting area to manage stormwater.
5. Landscaping plans shall identify areas of the site with suitable soils for stormwater
infiltration and LID features.
6. Above ground stormwater improvements, such as swales, ponds, or ditches, shall be
sloped, graded, or otherwise designed to avoid the need for protective fencing and to
give the appearance of a natural landscape feature. Above ground stormwater
improvements shall be landscaped with appropriate plant and tree species.
7. All stormwater management measures and LID features shall be consistent with the
requirements of BMC Title 14.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.81.070 Street frontage landscaping.
The following requirements shall apply to all portions of a site abutting a public or private street:
A. Minimum Width. A landscaping strip with a minimum width of 10 feet shall be provided
along all public and private streets.
B. Planting Requirements.
1. Street trees shall be provided at intervals of 30 feet on center except as minimally
necessary to accommodate obstructions such as traffic control signs, bus stops,
utilities, required sight lines, and driveways. In such cases additional trees shall be
provided in groups in order to achieve an overall ratio of one tree for every 30 feet of
street frontage. When a dominant pattern of street trees is present along nearby street
frontages the same species shall be used. Where no dominant pattern is present trees
shall be selected using the city's street tree selection guide. When street trees are
provided in a planting or buffer strip in a public right-of-way, trees may be selected
for the frontage strip that complement or contrast with the street trees and may be
grouped together provided at least one tree is provided for every 30 feet of street
frontage.
2. A mixture of small, medium, and large shrubs shall be provided at a rate of one shrub
for every four feet of street frontage.
3. Ground cover shall be provided in all areas not occupied by trees or shrubs consistent
with the requirements of this chapter (BMC § 17.81.060(B)(7)).
C. Exceptions.
1. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths may cross a street frontage landscaping strip;
2. Driveways may cross a street frontage landscaping strip;
3. Signs that fully comply with city's sign code (chapter 17.95 BMC) may be located
within a street frontage landscaping strip;
4. Building awnings, balconies, bay windows and other similar architectural features
located at the top of, or above, the first story of a building may extend over a street
frontage landscaping strip;
5. Downtown. A street frontage landscaping strip shall not be required in areas of the
downtown growth area where buildings are required to be located at the edge of the
right-of-way, or where a maximum setback applies that is less than 10 feet. In such
cases street trees shall be provided in tree wells or curb bulb-outs approved by the
city's public works department and any remaining area between the building line and
the sidewalk shall be fully landscaped.
D. Planting Strips. When a planting or buffer strip is provided in the public right-of-way street
trees shall be provided. Street tree spacing and species selection shall be consistent with the
requirements of subsection (B) of this section.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.81.080 Perimeter landscaping.
A. Minimum width: five feet.
B. Planting Requirements.
1. Trees shall be planted at a ratio of one tree for every 30 feet of perimeter landscaping
area. A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be used and no more than 60
percent of the required trees may be deciduous;
2. Medium sized shrubs shall be planted in triangulated rows at intervals of 24 inches or
less.
3. Ground cover shall be provided in all areas not occupied by trees or shrubs consistent
with the requirements of this chapter (BMC § 17.81.060(B)(7)).
C. Exceptions.
1. Areas occupied by buildings where no building setback or screening is required;
2. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths may cross a perimeter landscaping strip;
3. Driveways may cross a street frontage landscaping strip.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.81.090 Parking lot landscaping.
The purpose of this section is to mitigate the negative impacts associated with parking areas
by providing shade, interrupting and infiltrating precipitation, providing trees to interrupt wind
gusts, and blocking glare from headlights.
A. Applicability. This section applies to off-street parking area that contains 20 or more
parking spaces.
B. Minimum Area. At least 15 square feet of landscaping shall be provided for each interior
parking space. An interior parking space is a parking space not abutting a building or the
perimeter of a site.
C. Configuration of Parking Lot Landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall be located at the
ends of parking columns, between parking stalls, or between rows of parking. Planting
islands shall have a minimum area of 65 square feet.
D. Planting Requirements.
1. Trees. One tree shall be provided for every six parking spaces.
2. Shrubs. Small or medium shrubs shall be provided. If small shrubs are used, they shall
be planted at intervals of 18 inches on center or less. If large shrubs are used they
shall be planted at intervals of 24 inches on center or less.
3. Ground cover. Ground cover shall be provided in all areas not occupied by trees or
shrubs consistent with the requirements of this chapter (BMC § 17.81.060(B)(7)).
4. Landscape Protection. Curbs or wheel stops shall be used to prevent vehicles from
damaging parking lot landscaping.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.81.110 Buffers and screening.
Certain uses, such as residential developments, can be negatively impacted when located
adjacent to incompatible uses, such as industrial sites, due to negative environmental impacts
such as noise, glare, and dust. Landscaped buffers and screening can be used to mitigate
these impacts, soften the visual transition between developments located in different zoning
classifications, and to prevent conflicts between incompatible uses. Landscape screening can
also be used to establish visual boundaries or screen certain site improvements such as
mechanical equipment, trash enclosures, storage yards, or service areas. The purpose of this
section is to identify and prescribe an appropriate range of buffer and screening methods.
A. The purpose of this section is to accomplish the following:
1. Establish a buffer between incompatible developments located on adjacent sites with
different zoning classifications;
2. Screen or conceal service areas, trash enclosures, mechanical equipment, storage
yards, and other similar site improvements;
3. Establish a visual transition between streets and adjoining parking areas or drive
aisles;
4. Minimize the environmental impacts associated with freeway and railroad corridors,
including light, noise, and air quality impacts;
5. Prevent conflicts between urban development and rural resource activities such as
agricultural uses;
6. Provide any screening or buffers required as mitigation through a conditional use
permit process.
B. Standard Buffer and Screening Types. This section identifies the standard buffer or
screening methods referenced in the Burlington Municipal Code. When a given buffer type
or screening method is required by the Burlington Municipal Code it shall be consistent
with the specifications identified in this section. These requirements shall be regarded as
minimum standards. Additional screening or buffer requirements may apply to specific
uses, developments, or site improvements.
1. Type I – General Screening. General screening is intended to obscure trash
enclosures, mechanical equipment, outdoor storage and other similar features.
a. Minimum Width. The minimum buffer width shall be five feet.
b. Physical Screening. A solid sight-obscuring fence or wall with a minimum
height of six feet shall be provided.
c. Shrubs. A combination of small and medium shrubs shall be provided. A
minimum of one medium shrub and one small shrub shall be provided for every
four feet of buffer.
d. Ground cover shall be provided for all areas not occupied by shrubs.
e. Exceptions. The landscaped buffer required by this section is not required in
areas where a gate, driveway, or path is present.
2. Type II – Low Wall or Earth Berm. This buffer type is used for screening parking
lots, drive-through lanes, drive aisles and other similar features located adjacent to
streets. Type II buffers must include both physical screening and landscaping.
Physical screening shall be provided using either a low wall, raised planter, or an earth
berm as described below.
a. Minimum Width. The minimum buffer width shall be 10 feet.
b. Low Wall. If a low wall is used to provide physical screening it shall be
constructed of masonry or concrete, and shall have a minimum height of three
feet. If the wall is adjacent to a street it shall be set back at least five feet from
the right-of-way.
c. Raised Planter. If a raised planter is used to provide physical screening it shall
be constructed of masonry or concrete, shall have a minimum height of three
feet, and a minimum width of four feet. If the raised planter is adjacent to a street
it shall be set back at least five feet from the right-of-way. The planter shall be
completely landscaped.
d. Earth Berm. Earth berms shall have a minimum height of two feet, a maximum
slope of 33 percent (one foot of vertical height for every three feet of horizontal
distance). The crest of the berm shall be planted with a row of small shrubs
planted at intervals of two feet or less on center to form a dense opaque buffer.
The shrubs required by this provision shall be evergreen species and may be
used to meet the landscaping requirement in subsection (B)(2)(e) of this section.
e. Landscaping. Type II buffers shall be planted with a mixture of small and
medium sized shrubs at a ratio of one shrub for every four feet of buffer area.
Ground cover shall be provided for all areas not occupied by shrubs. At least 75
percent of the required shrubs shall be evergreen varieties.
3. Type III – Separation Buffer. This buffer type is intended to separate more intensive
uses from less intensive uses in situations where the anticipated impacts are largely
aesthetic. A type III buffer combines a solid sight-obscuring fence or wall with
evergreen trees and shrubs to create a year-round visual screen.
a. Minimum Width. The minimum buffer width shall be 10 feet.
b. Physical Screening. A solid sight-obscuring fence or wall at least six feet in
height shall be provided.
c. Landscaping. In addition to any normally required perimeter landscaping
evergreen trees shall be provided at intervals of 15 feet or less. The trees
required by this provision may be used to meet normally applicable tree planting
requirements for perimeter landscaping.
4. Type IV – High Intensity Buffer. This buffer type is intended to separate high
intensity uses with potentially significant light, noise, glare, and dust impacts from
less intensive uses. For example, a high intensity buffer would be appropriate for
separating an industrial site from a residentially zoned parcel. High intensity buffers
must employ a solid site obscuring fence or wall and a dense opaque band of
evergreen vegetation. In order to provide adequate acoustic separation, type IV
buffers that provide physical screening with a fence, as opposed to a masonry wall,
must provide an additional 10 feet of landscaped area.
a. Minimum Width. If a masonry wall is used the required buffer width shall be 15
feet. If a fence is used the required buffer width shall be 25 feet.
b. Physical Screening. Type IV buffers must include a solid sight-obscuring fence
or wall with a minimum height of six feet.
c. Landscaping. In addition to any normally required perimeter landscaping
triangulated rows of evergreen trees shall be provided at intervals of 15 feet. A
minimum of one large shrub for every four feet of buffer area must be provided,
75 percent of which must be evergreen varieties. The trees required by this
provision may be used to meet normally applicable tree planting requirements
for perimeter landscaping.
C. Incompatible Uses.
Table 17.81.110.C-1
Adjacent Zoning Designation or Area and Required Buffer Type1
Freeway
Zone Where or
Development Is RD and RA-2 and MUC and CI and Resource Railroad
Proposed RA-1 MUR PFT-1 PFT-2 Zones ROW
RD and RA-1 N/A None None None Type IV Type IV
RA-2 and MUR Type III N/A None None Type IV Type IV
MUC and PFT-1 Type III Type III None None Type IV Type III
Table 17.81.110.C-1
Adjacent Zoning Designation or Area and Required Buffer Type1
Freeway
Zone Where or
Development Is RD and RA-2 and MUC and CI and Resource Railroad
Proposed RA-1 MUR PFT-1 PFT-2 Zones ROW
CI and PFT-2 Type IV Type IV Type III None Type IV None
Resource Zones N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Freeway or Type IV2 Type IV2 Type IV2 Type IV2 N/A N/A
Railroad ROW
Notes:
(1) An adjacent property is one that directly abuts the property on which development is
occurring. Properties separated by a street or railroad right-of-way shall not be considered
adjacent and no buffer shall be required.
(2) Applies only to freeway projects involving ROW acquisition, widening, or major
construction.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.81.120 Landscaping maintenance and tree retention.
The following requirements shall apply to all uses and developments except for landscaping or
yards associated with individual residences or dwellings:
A. General Requirements.
1. Dead and dying vegetation shall be promptly removed and replaced. Trees and plants
shall be replaced with the same species unless an alternative replacement with similar
characteristics is approved by the community development director.
2. Vegetation shall be kept trimmed as necessary to avoid obstructing sidewalks, paths,
streets, parking areas, or driveways.
3. Noxious weeds and invasive species shall be removed and properly disposed of.
4. Exposed soils shall be avoided. When erosion is observed corrective actions shall be
taken immediately. Corrective actions may include providing additional ground cover
or shrubs, mulch or other similar material. In cases of significant erosion it may be
appropriate to regrade the area to reduce the steepness of the slope.
5. Landscaping areas required by this chapter shall not be used for parking, storage, or
display. Under no circumstances shall vehicles be parked in landscaping areas or
buffers.
B. Pruning and Tree Protection. Excessive pruning and tree topping is prohibited except as
authorized by this chapter. The following requirements shall apply to any trees planted to
satisfy the requirements of this chapter and to existing significant trees:
1. Trees should be pruned in a manner that allows them to attain their full natural height
and shall not be topped except as minimally necessary to prevent damage to buildings
or utilities;
2. All pruning work should comply with ANSI A300 (Part 1 – 2017), "Tree, Shrub and
Other Woody Plant Management – Standard Practices, to maintain long term health"
unless alternative methods are specified by an arborist;
3. When trees and shrubs are required for screening or buffering, or for the purpose of
creating a visually opaque hedge, pruning shall maintain the visual opaqueness of the
screen, buffer, or hedge.
C. Significant Trees.
1. This section shall apply to all significant trees except as follows:
a. Trees located within a public street right-of-way when the work is performed
by, or at the direction of, the city consistent with chapter 12.20 BMC;
b. Removal, pruning or modification as minimally necessary to prevent damage to
overhead or below ground utilities when the work is performed by, or at the
direction of, a public or private utility;
c. Trees located within the boundaries of an existing landscaped yard associated
with an individual dwelling, except for redevelopment projects;
d. The construction of a single detached dwelling, duplex, or small multiunit
building and residential land divisions involving the creation of four lots or less.
2. Definition. A significant tree is any tree that is at least six inches in diameter at breast
height (DBH). A tree growing with multiple stems shall be considered a significant
tree if any one of the stems, when measured at a point six inches from the joint with
the main trunk, is at least four inches in diameter. The following species shall not be
considered significant trees regardless of size:
a. Black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia);
b. Cottonwood (Populous freemontii);
c. Native alder (Native Alnus only);
d. Native willow (Native Salix only);
e. Lombardy poplar (Populous nigra).
3. Retention. Significant trees shall be incorporated into the project design and site
layout whenever possible and may only be removed under the following
circumstances:
a. When absolutely necessary to accommodate a proposed development and where
no feasible option exists for incorporating the tree into the overall site layout;
b. Hazard Trees and Nuisance Trees. Hazard and nuisance trees may be removed
with city authorization. In such cases an arborist's report may be required to
document the nature and extent of the hazard or nuisance and to demonstrate
that no feasible alternative to removal exists.
4. Significant trees shall be protected during construction or development unless
removal is authorized pursuant to this chapter. Temporary construction fencing shall
be placed around the tree and no equipment, chemicals, soil deposits or construction
materials may be placed within the barrier. When a landscaping plan is required all
significant trees shall be identified and a protection plan shall be included. For all
projects the department may specify any measures necessary to ensure the protection
of significant trees and may require that an arborist prepare the tree protection plan.
5. Approval Required. Significant trees shall not be removed without prior authorization
from the department. An arborist's report, site plan, or other documentation may be
required in order to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section. In
emergency situations where an immediate threat to human life or property exists
hazard trees may be removed without city authorization provided the department is
notified the next business day. In the event of a natural disaster, such as a flood or
windstorm, the department shall be authorized to temporarily suspend all approval
and notification requirements.
6. Replacement. When significant trees are removed replacement trees shall be provided
in accordance with the following provisions:
a. Significant trees shall be replaced at the following rates:
Table 17.81.120.C-1
Number of Required Replacement
Diameter (DBH) Tree Removed Trees
6" – 18" 2
> 18" 4
b. All deciduous replacement trees shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches
in diameter and coniferous evergreens shall be at least eight feet in height.
c. Replacement trees shall be planted on the same site where the tree removal
occurred; provided, that in unique circumstances where on-site replacement is
not feasible off-site replacement may be authorized. When off-site replacement
is authorized replacement trees shall be planted in a publicly owned park, open
space area or conservation easement within the city of Burlington.
d. A planting plan, prepared by an arborist or landscape architect, shall be provided
specifying any requirements necessary to ensure the replacement trees become
fully established and self-sustaining, such as planting instructions, staking,
temporary watering, or mulching.
e. Replacement is not required for diseased or hazardous trees except in cases
where the damage or disease is due to intentional actions.
7. Except when explicitly authorized by this chapter the excessive pruning, topping, or
deliberate damage of significant trees shall be prohibited, including any action that
results in a loss of more than 20 percent of the tree's root system, the removal of more
than 50 percent of the live crown of the tree, or any other action that significantly
alters the tree's growth potential. Such actions constitute "removal" and will be
considered a violation of this chapter.
8. Violations. In addition to any other applicable fines, penalties, or enforcement
provisions, a replanting plan and replacement trees shall be provided for the
unauthorized removal of a significant tree.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)