17.95.010 Title.
This chapter shall be called "Signs."
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.020 Application.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, erection, installation, maintenance,
alteration, expansion, or development of all signs, signage, and sign structures within the city of
Burlington.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.030 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the regulation of signs, to assist
businesses in contributing to the economic well-being of the community by increasing the
overall effectiveness of visual communications, to provide a harmonious relationship of urban
graphics and their settings, and to avoid the visual clutter that is potentially harmful to traffic and
pedestrian safety, property values, business opportunities and the community's appearance.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.040 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW
and other applicable laws.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.050 General provisions.
A. Conflicting Standards. All signs shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, except
where more specific standards for signs are specified for a special planning area, zone, or
district. In such case the more specific standards shall apply.
B. Signs Subject to State Approval. All signs visible to the traveling public from state
highways are subject to the regulations and permit requirements of the State Department of
Transportation. Where the regulations of the state and city differ, the more restrictive
regulations shall govern.
C. Building Code Compliance. All signs for which a building permit is required shall comply
with the applicable provisions of the building code adopted by the city and codified in
BMC Title 15.
D. Address Display. The signing program for a multifamily, commercial or industrial
development shall include the display of street numbers for the development on the sign,
support structure, or building where it can be seen from adjacent roads, as specified in
BMC Title 15.
E. Sign Clearances. A minimum of eight feet above sidewalks and 15 feet above driveways
shall be provided under freestanding or projecting signs.
F. Setbacks. Signs shall be situated in a manner so as not to adversely affect safety, corner
vision, public rights-of-way, improvements or future improvements, easements, or other
similar conditions.
G. Illuminated Signs.
1. Internally illuminated signs, or lights used to indirectly illuminate signs, shall be
placed, shielded or deflected so as not to shine into residential dwelling units or
structures or impair the vision of the driver of any vehicle.
2. No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner which may be
confused with or construed to be traffic signals or control devices, or lights on an
emergency vehicle.
3. No person shall construct, establish, create or maintain any stationary exterior lighting
or illumination system or any interior system which is intended to be viewed from a
public right-of-way used for vehicular traffic which system contains or utilizes:
a. Any exposed incandescent lamp with a wattage in excess of 25 watts unless a
dimmer or sun screen is attached;
b. Any exposed incandescent lamp with an internal or external metallic reflector;
c. Any continuous or sequential flashing operation.
4. All lighted signs shall have low or soft illumination or be shielded.
H. Moving Signs. No sign, sign structure, or portion thereof shall be designed to rotate, flutter,
or appear to move, except as specifically provided in this code.
I. Maintenance. All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall
be kept in good repair and be maintained in a safe condition. All signs and the sites upon
which they are located shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and attractive condition. Signs
shall be kept free from rust, corrosion, peeling paint, or other surface deterioration. The
display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted.
J. Nonconforming Signs. Legally established signs and sign structures which do not comply
with the regulations and requirements in this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of
chapter 17.100 BMC.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.060 Permit requirements.
A. A permit shall be required to erect, re-erect, construct, reface, alter, expand, or relocate any
sign or sign structure unless the type of sign is specifically listed in the exceptions section
of this chapter (BMC § 17.95.070).
B. Applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the director upon forms provided by the
city. Sign permit applications shall include:
1. Site (plot) plan drawn to scale showing the location of the affected site, lot, premises,
building or buildings, and sign or signs, showing both existing signs and awnings and
the proposed sign;
2. Scale drawing of the proposed sign or sign revision, including size, height, copy,
structural and footing details, material specifications, methods of attachment,
illumination, landscaping, front and end views of awning, sample of canvas, soil,
seismic and wind calculations, photograph of site and building marked to show where
sign or awning is proposed, and any other information required to ensure compliance
with appropriate laws;
3. Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or property where the sign is
to be erected, if not the applicant;
4. A permit fee per current fee resolution;
5. A list identifying the size and type of each existing sign located on the building, lot,
site, premises, or business establishment;
6. Any other information requested by the director for purposes of demonstrating
compliance with this chapter or any other applicable regulatory requirements.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.070 Exceptions.
The following shall not require a permit. These exceptions shall not be construed as an
exemption from the other requirements of this chapter or other applicable laws and regulations.
A. Address signs are allowed without permit when the following conditions are met:
1. One sign allowed per street frontage displaying the street number and/or name of the
occupant of the premises;
2. Such signs may be attached to the building or may be on a post no more than four feet
high, and set back at least three feet from the public right-of-way;
3. Such signs may include identification of an on-premises professional office;
4. Such signs may not exceed two square feet in area;
5. Such signs shall be limited to a maximum letter height of eight inches.
B. Temporary signs as defined in subsection (B)(7) of this section are allowed without permit
when the following conditions are met:
1. Only one sign is allowed for each street frontage of the property upon which the sign
is located. Small directional signs may be placed at the end of the block where an
occurrence requiring a sign is located with the property owner's permission.
2. Signs shall not exceed nine square feet in area and six feet in height; flags must not
exceed 15 square feet in area.
3. Signs shall not be illuminated.
4. Signs must be set back a minimum distance of five feet from the frontage road and 10
feet from adjoining properties unless exceptions are made by the community
development director or designee. Sign may not be placed on public street right-of-
way or private property without an owner's permission. Directional signs may not be
placed in any improved roadway. Portable signs must be placed in a way that does not
unduly obstruct foot or vehicular traffic.
5. Temporary signs shall not be placed upon public utility poles.
6. Signs shall be placed or erected at the time of the occurrence requiring the use of the
sign and removed within 48 hours of the end of the occurrence requiring use of the
sign.
7. Temporary signs include signs intended to be or allowed to be displayed for a limited
period of time. Excepted temporary signs do not include ongoing commercial signage
or readerboards. Temporary signs typically include the following:
a. Construction signs;
b. Real estate signs;
c. Directional signs;
d. Flags;
e. Garage sale signs;
f. Public notification signs; and
g. Signs, banners, streamers and other similar apparatus used in conjunction with a
community event. A "community event" is an event of a public nature sponsored
by the city or a community club, chamber of commerce, or other community
organization.
Temporary signs that do not meet the description and conditions set forth above
may be allowed pursuant to a permit pursuant to the conditions and terms of BMC
§ 17.95.125.
C. Political Signs. Political signs on private property where allowed by the property owner or
upon properties that lawfully constitute a public forum. Such signs shall be removed within
one week after the election for which the sign is posted. Signs shall not exceed 16 square
feet in size as viewed from one direction unless placed on an approved off-site location
with greater allowed size limitations. Such signs shall observe the corner vision
requirements of this title, and shall not be situated in a manner which creates a hazard.
D. Incidental signs located on the premises may be displayed on any window or door.
Incidental signs are permanent signs that include emblems, decals, nameplates and other
similar signs indicating residence, affiliation or membership in organizations, acceptance
of credit cards, brand names of items sold, and other such information which pertains to the
use of the premises.
E. Temporary Window Signs. Posters and other signs of a temporary nature which advertise
or inform the public of current prices or events may be displayed on the inside of any
window or door of a business located in a commercial, business, or industrial district,
covering a maximum of 20 percent of the window or door area.
F. Within a Building. Any sign which is located within a building and which is clearly
intended to be visible primarily to people located within the building.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.080 Review of signs/design standards.
The size, design, color, lighting, location and supporting structures of nonexempt signs shall
comply with the following provisions, in addition to other applicable provisions of this chapter:
A. Legibility. All forms of sign copy shall be of a size, color, style, spacing, and shape to
produce a legible, concise, and uncluttered message as viewed from adjacent public roads
or from an internal circulation road or walkway towards which it is oriented.
B. Design. Signs shall be designed using shapes, graphics, colors, materials, and lighting
which are coordinated, integrated into, and a natural extension of the design of the building,
development or business identified. On-building signs shall be incorporated into the design
of the building and shall not be placed in locations which interrupt, detract from or change
the architectural lines of the building.
C. Coordination. In multi-tenant developments, every effort shall be made to coordinate the
size, placement, and colors of signs to promote a pleasing image and avoid a confusing,
cluttered appearance, while retaining individual business identity through the use of letter
style, logos or symbols. An overall sign program addressing the requirements of this
section shall be required for multi-tenant developments, and it shall be the responsibility of
the owner/manager of the development to inform all tenants of the requirements of the
approved sign program.
D. Sign Structure. When visible, the supporting structure of the sign shall be incorporated into
the overall sign design, and shall be in scale with the sign. The sign structure, and any street
numbers included on the sign structure, shall not be counted for purposes of determining
sign area.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.090 Sign regulations, residential zones.
Only those sign types listed below or identified as exceptions in BMC § 17.95.070 shall be
permitted in the RD or RA zones.
A. Residential Nameplate Signs.
1. Permitted sign types: building-mounted only.
2. Maximum sign area: two square feet.
3. Maximum number: one for each dwelling unit.
4. Location and setback requirements: may be mounted on a dwelling unit or accessory
structure.
5. Permitted illumination: external illumination only.
B. Home Occupation and Nonresidential Uses. The following standards shall apply to signs
identifying home occupations or permitted nonresidential uses:
1. Permitted sign types: interior, building-mounted, or freestanding.
2. Maximum sign area: six square feet (24 inches by 36 inches).
3. Maximum number: one sign.
4. Location and Setback Requirements. Home occupation signs must be located on the
same lot as the dwelling unit housing the home occupation and:
a. Interior signs shall be located within the building housing the home occupation;
and
b. Building-mounted signs shall be affixed to the building housing the home
occupation; and
c. Freestanding signs shall be located within 10 feet of the building housing the
home occupation. Freestanding signs shall be subject to a maximum height of
four feet, six inches.
5. Permitted illumination: external illumination only.
C. Signs Identifying Residential Developments.
1. Permitted sign types: freestanding signs only.
2. Maximum sign height: five feet.
3. Maximum sign area: 30 square feet.
4. Maximum Number. One sign shall be allowed for each development or complex,
even when more than one tax lot or ownership is included in the development, except
as follows:
a. When an additional sign is needed to provide identification of the development
at major public access points located on two different roads; or
b. When two single-faced signs oriented in two different directions are proposed in
lieu of a two-sided identification sign;
c. In business park developments, additional signage may be permitted to identify
the residential portions of the development, as well as the commercial or
industrial portions.
5. Location and Setback Requirements. Signs shall be situated in a manner so as not to
adversely affect safety, corner vision, public rights-of-way improvements or future
improvements, easements, or other similar conditions.
6. Permitted Illumination. External illumination only.
D. Noncommercial Public Service Signs.
1. Permitted sign types: freestanding, building-mounted, and readerboard.
2. Maximum sign height: see BMC § 17.95.100(B).
3. Maximum Sign Area.
a. Freestanding signs: 24 square feet per side.
b. Building-mounted signs: see BMC § 17.95.100(E).
4. Maximum Number.
a. Freestanding signs: one freestanding sign on each premises.
b. Building-Mounted Signs. Building-mounted signs shall be subject to the
maximum area limits specified in BMC § 17.95.100(E).
5. Permitted Illumination. External illumination only.
6. Special Standards. Readerboard signs that are not electronic are allowed; provided,
that the area of the readerboard shall be included within the total allowable square
footage for signage.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.100 Sign regulations, mixed use commercial and commercial-industrial zones.
A. General. The following regulations and standards shall apply to all on-premises signs
located in the MUC and CI zones; provided, that this section shall not apply to signs located
within the downtown priority development area which shall be subject to the standards in
BMC § 17.95.110. Only those signs listed below shall be permitted.
B. Freestanding Signs, Individual on Premises. Individual businesses or uses that are not
located in a multiple-tenant development may be identified by a single freestanding on-
premises sign. The following regulations shall apply to all freestanding signs except for
freestanding signs located within a multiple-tenant development which shall be subject to
the requirements identified in subsections (C) and (D) of this section:
1. Maximum sign height: 25 feet, except that:
a. Freestanding on-premises signs located within 500 feet of an I-5 interchange
which are associated with a use catering to freeway travelers such as a gas
station, eating and drinking establishment, or hotel may have a maximum height
of 50 feet; and
b. Freestanding on-premises signs located on lots with freeway frontage may be 45
feet in height.
2. Maximum sign area: 50 square feet as viewed from one direction, except that:
a. An additional 30 square feet may be permitted if the site is larger than one-half
acre; and
b. An additional 30 square feet may be permitted if identification of more than one
use within a development is included on the sign; and
c. An additional 30 square feet may be permitted if the sign uses natural materials
(carved or sand-blasted wood, or marble or stone) and indirect illumination; and
d. An additional 30 square feet may be permitted for freestanding on-premises
signs located within 500 feet of an I-5 interchange or on lots with freeway
frontage when associated with a use catering to freeway travelers; and
e. Sign area may be increased by a maximum of 20 square feet for time and
temperature only if a time and/or temperature display is incorporated in the
design of the sign, as further regulated in BMC § 17.95.120; and
f. For developments over 30 acres in size, an additional 30 square feet of sign area
is allowed for each tenant larger than 10,000 square feet in size up to a
maximum of 350 square feet.
3. Maximum number: one sign for each tenant or use.
4. Location and Setback Requirements.
a. All freestanding on-premises signs shall be located on the same site or premises
as the tenant or use with which they are associated; and
b. All freestanding on-premises signs shall be located within a landscaped planter
with protective curbs located at least three feet from all support elements; and
c. All freestanding on-premises signs shall be subject to a minimum property line
setback of 10 feet. This setback shall be measured from the outer edge of the
sign closest to the property line.
5. Permitted Illumination. Internal or external illumination may be permitted. Externally
illuminated signs shall be subject to BMC § 17.95.050(G).
C. Development Complex Signs, Primary. The following standards and regulations shall
apply to all multiple-tenant developments and to freestanding signs located in a multiple-
tenant development:
1. Maximum sign height: see subsection (B)(1) of this section.
2. Maximum sign area: see subsection (B)(2) of this section.
3. Maximum Number. One development complex sign shall be allowed for each
multiple-tenant development, even when more than one tax lot or ownership is
included in the development, except that:
a. Two additional signs may be used to identify a multiple-tenant development if
the development has access points located at different major arterials; provided,
that the additional signs shall be located at an arterial point; and further
provided, that only one such sign shall be located at each access point; and
b. Two single-faced signs oriented in opposite directions may be used in lieu of a
single double-faced identification sign.
4. Location and Setback Requirements. Development complex signs shall be located
within the multiple-tenant development with which they are associated and may only
be used to advertise the development and the tenants and uses located within the
development. Development complex signs shall be subject to a minimum property
line setback of 10 feet.
5. Permitted Illumination. Internal or external illumination may be permitted. Externally
illuminated signs shall be subject to BMC § 17.95.050(G).
D. Development Complex Signs, Supplemental. A monument sign may be used to identify
individual tenants within a multiple-tenant development which are not otherwise identified
by a primary development complex sign subject to the following:
1. Permitted sign types: freestanding only.
2. Maximum sign height: six feet.
3. Maximum sign area: 36 square feet.
4. Maximum Number. Only one monument sign shall be allowed for each tenant or
business.
5. Location and Setback Requirements.
a. Each sign shall be located in front of the tenant or business it identifies; and
b. Each sign shall be located within a landscaped area surrounded by curbing
located at least three feet from the base of the sign unless the sign is located next
to a sidewalk;
c. Each sign shall be located at least 50 feet from any primary development
complex sign and 100 feet from any supplemental development complex sign;
d. Signs shall not be located within a radius of 20 feet of the corner of any two
streets or the corner of a driveway and street.
6. Material and Design Requirements. Colors and materials shall be the same, or
substantially the same, as those used on the building housing the tenant or business
identified by the sign.
7. Permitted Illumination. Internal or external illumination may be used subject to the
general illumination standards in BMC § 17.95.050(G).
E. Building-Mounted Signs. Building-mounted signs identifying the use of space within the
building on which the sign is mounted may be permitted subject to the following
conditions:
1. Maximum Sign Area. The total combined area of all building-mounted signs on a
building frontage shall be limited to two square feet for each linear foot of building
frontage, except that if a tenant is not identified by any other sign 60 square feet may
be permitted regardless of frontage length.
2. Permitted Illumination. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated subject to
BMC § 17.95.050(G).
F. Movie Theaters. The following additional provisions shall apply to on-premises signs
advertising movie theaters:
1. Movie theaters with freeway frontage or located within 500 feet of a freeway
interchange may have up to two freestanding signs provided one freestanding sign is
located along an arterial and one sign is located along the freeway frontage. Signs
permitted by this provision shall be limited to 100 square feet per sign face.
2. Readerboards may be incorporated into freestanding signs or building-mounted signs;
provided, that no moving messages shall be permitted; and further provided, that the
total area of any such sign does not exceed the maximum permitted sign area.
G. Permitted Temporary and Portable Signs. The following regulations shall apply to
temporary and portable signs permitted pursuant to BMC § 17.95.125:
1. No more than a combination of one portable sign and two banners shall be permitted
for any business.
2. In addition to permanent signage, a business may also display one movable sign
during business hours up to a maximum size of six square feet per sign face.
3. Signs shall be secured, anchored, weighted or staked to handle wind loads of 50 miles
per hour.
4. In the retail core, signs shall be located behind the sidewalk on private property.
5. In downtown, signs shall be located within the area for outdoor display of goods, as
provided in BMC § 17.45.080(B)(2), or other approved location.
6. Well-maintained banners may be used for promotions if securely anchored.
7. Up to two well-maintained blade banners per street front may be used on private
property and not extend over public right-of-way, if securely anchored.
H. Walking Advertisers. Persons carrying or wearing portable advertising signs or costumes
designed to advertise a business, event, sale or season/holiday with a permit describing
location, supervision and public safety.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.105 Sign regulations, mixed use residential zones.
A. General. The following regulations and standards shall apply to all on-premises signs
located in the MUR zones. Only those signs listed below shall be permitted.
B. Permitted sign types: building-mounted or freestanding.
C. Maximum sign height: Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of five
feet.
D. Maximum sign area: 20 square feet.
E. Maximum number: one sign for each building or premises.
F. Location and Setback Requirements. Freestanding signs shall be located in front of, and
within 15 feet of, the building they are associated with.
G. Permitted Illumination. Internally illuminated signs are prohibited. Externally illuminated
signs shall be subject to the general standards in BMC § 17.95.050(G).
H. Permitted Temporary and Portable Signs. The following regulations shall apply to
temporary and portable signs:
1. No more than a combination of one portable sign and two banners shall be permitted
for any business.
2. In addition to permanent signage, a business may also display one movable sign
during business hours up to a maximum size of six square feet per sign face.
3. Signs shall be secured, anchored, weighted or staked to handle wind loads of 50 miles
per hour.
4. In the retail core, signs shall be located behind the sidewalk on private property.
5. In the downtown priority development area, signs shall be located within the area for
outdoor display of goods, as provided in BMC § 17.45.080(B)(2), or other approved
location.
6. Well-maintained banners may be used for promotions if securely anchored.
7. Up to two well-maintained blade banners per street front may be used on private
property and not extend over public right-of-way, if securely anchored.
I. Walking Advertisers. Persons carrying or wearing portable advertising signs or costumes
designed to advertise a business, event, sale or season/holiday with a permit describing
location, supervision and public safety.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.110 Sign regulations, downtown priority development area.
A. General. In addition to any other applicable standards or requirements identified in this
chapter, signs located within the downtown growth area shall be subject to the following
additional standards:
B. Permitted Sign Types. Each building or premises may have either a freestanding sign or a
building-mounted sign. Building-mounted signs may be projected signs.
C. Maximum Sign Height. Maximum sign height shall be 25 feet.
D. Maximum Sign Area. Maximum sign area shall be 25 square feet.
E. Maximum Number. A single sign is permitted for each building or premises.
F. Special Standards. Building-mounted signs which project over a sidewalk or alley (within
the right-of-way) shall have at least eight feet of vertical clearance from the sidewalk to the
bottom of the sign, or 15 feet of clearance from an alley to the bottom of the sign.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.112 Sign regulations, public facilities and transportation zones.
A. General. The following standards apply to signs located in the PFT zones.
B. Permitted Sign Types. Each building or premises may have both a freestanding sign and a
building-mounted sign. Building-mounted signs may be projected signs or rooftop signs.
C. Maximum Sign Height. Maximum sign height shall be 25 feet, except for rooftop signs
authorized by this section.
D. Maximum Sign Area. Maximum sign area shall be 25 square feet.
E. Maximum Number.
1. Building-mounted signs: one sign for each building facade;
2. Freestanding signs: one sign for each street frontage abutting the premises.
F. Special Standards.
1. Building-mounted signs which project over a sidewalk or alley (within the right-of-
way) shall have at least eight feet of vertical clearance from the sidewalk to the
bottom of the sign, or 15 feet of clearance from an alley to the bottom of the sign.
2. Rooftop signs shall only be permitted on gabled roofs and shall be located as close to
the eave line as possible. Under no circumstances shall a rooftop sign, or any portion
of a rooftop sign, extend above the peak of the roof it is attached to.
3. Prohibited Signs.
a. Signs located in a street right-of-way and off-premises signs except for traffic
control signs, temporary construction signs, signs necessary for emergency
management purposes, and signs installed under the provisions of the city's
wayfinding signage program (BMC § 17.95.130(D));
b. Signs owned, erected by, managed, maintained, or paid for by a private entity.
Only public signs are permitted in the PFT zones.
(Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.115 On-site traffic control and directories.
A. Traffic Control. Signs which direct the flow of traffic to, from and within the site area shall
observe the corner vision requirements of the district and shall be a maximum of three
square feet per side. See BMC § 17.70.050 and 17.70.060.
B. Directories. An on-site sign oriented primarily towards vehicle circulation which identifies
and directs traffic to a number of tenants, uses or buildings within the development,
including informational signs, shall be limited in area to a maximum of two square feet per
tenant, use or building specifically identified, up to a maximum of 40 square feet, and shall
not exceed 12 feet in height. Directories oriented toward pedestrian circulation areas,
including those attached to buildings, shall be a maximum of 24 square feet in area and
eight feet in height.
C. Menu Boards. On-site menus oriented toward internal circulation drives shall not exceed a
combined area of 40 square feet.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.120 Electronic changing message sign requirements.
A. A time and temperature sign is permitted up to a maximum of 20 square feet in area for
time and temperature only, in locations specified in BMC § 17.95.100.
B. An LED gas price sign is permitted with digit heights of six, eight, 12, 15, 22 and 30 inches
for gas prices only, in locations specified in BMC § 17.95.100, to be included in maximum
sign area.
C. Electronic message center signs and other changeable copy signs shall be incorporated into
a permanent identification sign which is otherwise permitted by this chapter. Approval for
electronic message center signs shall not be granted unless the following conditions are
satisfied:
1. Only one electronic message center sign shall be used in a development;
2. The changeable copy sign or electronic message center shall be integrated into a
nonelectronic sign and the electronic portion of the sign shall not exceed:
a. Eighty square feet in sign area for signs 40 feet or less in height;
b. One hundred fifty square feet in sign area for signs over 40 and less than 50 feet
in height;
c. Two hundred fifty square feet in sign area for signs 50 feet in height;
d. Sign pole width shall be a maximum of one-fourth of the sign width;
3. Electronic message centers and changeable copy signs may be used only to advertise
activities conducted or goods and services available on the property on which the sign
is located, or to present public service information;
4. Electronic message center signs are only permitted for a multiple-tenant development
complex;
5. Location shall be in the Westside special development area, within 100 feet of the
Interstate 5 right-of-way and the sign shall be oriented to Interstate 5, separated along
each side of I-5 by 1,500 feet;
6. The display shall comply with WAC 468-66-050 as summarized and amended here:
Electronic signs may be used only as on-premises signs and/or to present public
service information as follows:
a. Advertising messages on electronic signboards may contain words, phrases,
sentences, symbols, trademarks, and logos. A single message or a message
segment must have a static display time of at least two seconds after moving
onto the signboard, with all segments of the total message to be displayed within
10 seconds. A one-segment message may remain static on the signboard with no
duration limit.
b. Displays must appear as a picture that holds in a static position for a minimum
of four seconds.
c. Displays shall not appear to flash, undulate, or pulse, or portray explosions,
fireworks, flashes of light, or blinking or chasing lights. Displays shall not
appear to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce,
rotate, spin, twist, or otherwise portray graphics or animation as it moves onto,
is displayed on, or leaves the signboard.
d. No electronic sign lamp may be illuminated to a degree of brightness that is
greater than necessary for adequate visibility. In no case may the brightness
exceed 8,000 nits or equivalent candelas during daylight hours, or 1,000 nits or
equivalent candelas between dusk and dawn. Signs shall be programmed to
automatically adjust illumination for all times of day and night.
D. No other signs or illuminating devices shall have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.125 Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined and.
regulated by this code, include the following types:
1. "Electrically activated" means animated signs producing the illusion of movement by
means of electronic, electrical, or electro-mechanical input and/or illumination capable of
simulating movement through employment of the characteristics of one or both of the
classifications noted below:
a. Flashing. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is
characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either the
same as or less than the period of nonillumination. For the purposes of this chapter,
"flashing" will not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off
phases of illumination exceeds four seconds.
b. Patterned Illusionary Movement. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by simulated movement through alternate or sequential
activation of various illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive
light patterns designed to appear in some form of constant motion.
2. "Environmentally active" means animated signs or devices motivated by wind, thermal
changes or other natural environmental input, including spinners, pinwheels, pennant
strings, and/or other devices or displays that respond directly to naturally occurring external
motivation. Time or temperature displays shall not be construed as a direct response to the
natural environment.
3. "Mechanically activated" means animated signs characterized by repetitive motion and/
or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric motors or other
mechanically induced means.
"Antenna" means any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for
the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals.
1. "Omnidirectional antenna" (also known as a "whip antenna") transmits and receives radio
frequency signals in a 360-degree radial pattern. For the purpose of this title, an
omnidirectional antenna is up to 15 feet in height and up to four inches in diameter.
2. "Directional antenna" (also known as a "panel antenna") transmits and receives radio
frequency signals in a specific directional pattern of less than 360 degrees.
3. "Parabolic antenna" (also known as a "dish antenna") is a bowl-shaped device for the
reception and/or transmission of radio frequency communications signals in a specific
directional pattern.
"Arborist" means a person accredited by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA).
"Area of sign," "surface area of sign," or "sign area" means the area of a sign excluding sign
support structures, which do not form part of the sign proper or the display. Surface area shall be
measured as follows:
1. The surface area of the sign is determined by the height times the width of a typical
rectangular sign or other appropriate mathematical computation of surface area for
nonrectangular signs.
2. Surface area includes only one face of a double-faced sign where the faces of the sign are
parallel. If any face is offset from parallel by more than five degrees, such face shall be
counted as a separate surface area.
3. Surface area of a sign with more than two faces, such as a cube or pyramid, shall be
calculated as the sum of the surface area of all faces, divided by two.
4. In the event of an irregular, three-dimensional object that serves as signage, where the
surface area is not readily measurable, the surface area shall be calculated by the largest
area of the three-dimensional object visible from any one viewing angle.
Figure 1. Sign Surface Area Calculation
"Attached wireless communication facility" means a wireless communication facility that is
affixed to an existing structure and is not considered a component of the attached wireless
communication facility.
Automobile Wrecking Yard. See "wrecking yard" definition.
"Automotive parts and accessories sales" means an automotive retail sales and service use in
which goods are rented or sold primarily for use in motorized vehicles, but excluding gas
stations.
"Automotive retail sales and service" means a retail sales and service use in which goods are
rented or sold primarily for use in motorized vehicles, but excluding gas stations.
"Awning" means a roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of
shielding a door or window from the elements.
Figure 2. Awning
"Awning sign" means any sign erected upon, or against, an awning.
"B"
"Banner" means a flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed, including
blade banners.
"Banner sign" means a sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
"Bed and breakfast" means a single-family dwelling where up to two rooms or lodging units are
let as temporary accommodations for travelers or guests by the owner or occupant of the single-
family dwelling. Bed and breakfast establishments may provide limited food service to guests.
"Billboard" means an outdoor advertising sign containing a message, commercial or otherwise,
unrelated to the use or activity on the property on which the sign is located, and which is
customarily leased for commercial purposes, but not including attached directional signs (not
within the billboard face) as defined herein. Billboards are regulated in BMC § 17.95.130(A).
"Boarding house" or "rooming house" means a detached dwelling unit where two or more
rooms are separately rented. This term does not include hotels, bed and breakfasts, duplexes, or
multiunit buildings. Boarding houses are differentiated from hotels and bed and breakfasts by
providing accommodations for periods of 30 days or more. A boarding house does not constitute
a duplex or multiunit building because the kitchen and other housekeeping facilities are shared
by the building occupants. The individual rooms within a boarding house are not equipped with
kitchens or complete housekeeping facilities.
1. "Boarding house, small" means a boarding house where up to four rooms are separately
rented.
2. "Boarding house, large" means a boarding house where five or more rooms are separately
rented.
"Building" means a structure as defined in this chapter. For purposes of interpreting this title
(BMC Title 17) the term "building" shall mean all architecturally integrated components of the
structure under a single roof or built upon a single foundation. The term "building" may be
defined differently in other titles of the Burlington Municipal Code.
"Building area" means the total ground coverage of a building or structure which provides shelter
measured from the outside of its external walls or supporting members.
"Building height" means the vertical distance measured from the finished grade to the highest
point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height between
eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. If a structure has none of the above features
then the height shall be measured from the finished grade to the highest portion of the structure.
"Building-mounted sign" means a single- or multiple-faced sign of a permanent nature, made of
rigid material, attached to the facade of a building or the face of a marquee.
Figure 3. Building-Mounted (Wall) Sign
"Bulk material sales and storage" means the sale, storage, stockpiling, or blending of bulk
materials including, but not limited to, sand, gravel, bark, topsoil, dirt, rock, and other similar
materials. This definition does not include the following:
1. The sale of prepacked products or incidental quantities to consumers at nurseries, lumber
yards, building supply stores, or similar establishments;
2. Temporary stockpiles associated with an authorized and ongoing construction project;
3. Rock crushing plants, concrete mixing and batching plants, ready-mix concrete facilities,
or other similar uses.
"Burlington Hill special management area" means those portions of Burlington Hill with a
ground elevation 40 feet or more above sea level.
"C"
"Canopy" means a multi-sided overhead structure or architectural projection that provides
protection from the elements to persons or property. The surface(s) or soffit may be illuminated
by means of internal or external sources of light. This includes marquees.
"Canopy-mounted sign" means any sign or awning erected upon or against a canopy, including
marquee-mounted signs.
"Capital improvement" or "capital facility" means major durable public investments in land,
facilities or equipment such as streets, roads, sidewalks, paths, parks improvements, sanitary
sewer facilities, public water systems, pedestrian safety and streetscape features, firefighting
equipment, and city buildings.
"Capital improvement plan" or "CIP" means a component of the Burlington comprehensive
plan providing a detailed list of planned capital improvements covering a six-year period and
identifying the sources of money that will be used to pay for the planned improvements. The CIP
serves as the six-year financing plan required by chapter 36.70 RCW (GMA).
"Caretaker apartment" or "caretaker dwelling" mean an apartment or dwelling unit associated
with, and subordinate to, a primary permitted use or development and used to provide housing
for a person(s) employed to care for, or operate, the primary permitted use or development.
"Certificate of occupancy" means a written document issued by the city in accordance with the
provisions of the building permit. The certificate of occupancy indicates that the project has
been inspected for compliance with applicable uniform and development code requirements.
The certificate of occupancy gives permission to use or occupy the premises for the approved
proposed use.
"Changeable sign" means a sign with the capability of content change by means of manual or
remote input without reworking, repainting, or otherwise altering the physical composition of
the sign, including signs which are:
1. Electrically Activated. A changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed
by means of remote electrically energized on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or
pictographic components arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral to the
components, such as characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be
from an external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component display. See
also "electronic message sign or center."
2. Manually Activated. A changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed
manually.
"Charging station" means equipment used to charge electric vehicles.
"Co-location exists" means that more than one wireless communications provider mounts
equipment on a single support structure (i.e., building, monopole, lattice tower).
"Commercial child day care center" means a building, or a portion of a building, used to provide
early childhood education and learning services as defined in RCW43.215.010.
1. "Commercial child day care center, small," "mini commercial child day care center,"
or "mini commercial day care"means a commercial child day care center that provides
services to not more than 12 children at any one time.
2. "Commercial child day care center, large" or "commercial day care, large"means a
commercial child day care center that provides services to more than 12 children at a time.
3. "Commercial child day care center, public" or "child day care, public"means a large or
small day care center owned, operated by, or located on land owned by a government
agency.
"Commercial entertainment, indoors" means a use offering equipment, space, instruction, or
facilities for recreation, entertainment, or games of skill and wholly enclosed in a building.
Typical uses include arcades, athletic or health clubs, gyms, pool or billiard halls, indoor
swimming pools, bowling alleys, skating rinks, climbing gyms, concert venues, and dance halls.
This definition excludes public facilities.
1. a. "Indoor commercial entertainment, minor" means an indoor commercial recreation
facility with a ground floor area of 2,500 square feet or less and a total floor area of
5,000 square feet or more.
2. a. "Indoor commercial entertainment, major" means an indoor commercial recreation
facility with a ground floor area of more than 2,500 square feet or a total floor area in
excess of 5,000 square feet.
"Commission" shall mean the planning commission of the city.
"Community development director" means the official appointed and acting as the community
development director.
"Comprehensive plan" means the plan adopted by the city of Burlington pursuant to the
requirements of chapter 36.70A RCW (the Washington State Growth Management Act). The
city's comprehensive plan contains maps, illustrations, and descriptive text addressing a number
of elements, or subjects, including, but not limited to, land use, housing, transportation, capital
facilities, utilities, parks and recreation, and economic development. The comprehensive plan
also includes a number of related functional or implementation plans that are either included
within the body of the comprehensive plan, incorporated by reference, or incorporated by statute.
These related functional or implementation plans include, but are not limited to, the sewer plan,
stormwater plan, capital improvement plan (CIP), and transportation improvement plan (TIP).
"Conditional use" means a use or development which may, through a discretionary approval
process, be conditionally permitted in one or more zones. Conditional uses are those uses and
developments which are either identified as conditional in a particular zone, or which are not
listed as permitted or conditional in any zone. Conditional uses generally have the following
characteristics:
1. The impacts associated with the use or development are difficult to predict or ascertain
due to variabilities in the size, scale, and design of the use or development, or because
the activities associated with, or the technological processes employed by, the use or
development are untested, experimental, unproven, or poorly documented;
2. The exact location of the use or development may determine its impact on, and
compatibility with, surroundings uses, public streets, improvements and facilities;
3. The use or development requires a high level of analysis to determine if it will be, or can
be made to be, consistent with applicable comprehensive plan goals and policies, abutting
and adjacent uses, and the character of the surrounding neighborhood;
4. The use or development requires detailed and specific conditions of approval in order to be
compatible with surrounding uses, public streets, improvements, and facilities;
5. The use or development is not substantially similar in form, function, size, scale, or impact
to another use listed as permitted in one or more zones.
"Contractor services" or "contractor offices" means a facility housing a business or entity
engaged in a common trade or profession related to the maintenance or construction of buildings
and grounds such as construction, plumbing, electrical, HVAC, or landscaping. This definition
includes facilities where equipment or materials related to the contractor's business are stored or
maintained as an accessory use.
Corner Lot. See "lot" definitions.
"Council" or "city council" shall mean the city council of the city of Burlington.
"Coverage," "lot coverage," or "building coverage" means the area of a lot which is covered by
a roofed structure.
"Craft industries" means a use where arts or crafts are manufactured in a small scale facility
using skilled labor. Craft industries include art studios, woodworking and cabinet shops,
bakeries, kitchens, breweries, distilleries, wine making, and other similar activities. Craft
industries are owner operated enterprises where the owner staffs, directly participates in, and
manages, the day-to-day operations of the business. Craft industries may employ a small number
of employees in addition to the owner and members of the owner's immediate family. Craft
industries have a total floor area of 5,000 square feet or less and primarily operate during normal
business hours.
"D"
"Density" means the ratio of dwelling units to lot area.
"Detached building" means a building surrounded on all sides by open space.
"Developed land area" means those parts of a lot, site, or area of land that have been extensively
improved for an existing land use including building coverage, parking and loading areas,
service yards, impervious surfaces, and landscaped areas.
"Development" means any activity that results in a use or modification of land or its resources.
Development activities include, but are not limited to: dredging, drilling, dumping, filling,
earth movement, grading, clearing or removal of vegetation; storage of materials or equipment;
building or construction; land division, boundary line adjustments, lot segregations, subdivision
and short subdivisions; binding site plans; land use permit approvals; variances; shoreline
development or substantial development; and activities or uses allowed through conditional use
permits.
"Development complex sign" means a free-standing sign identifying a multiple-tenant
development, such as a shopping center or planned industrial park, which is controlled by a
single owner or landlord.
"Development right" means one residential unit of credit. This is calculated for unincorporated
Skagit County in the agriculture natural resource land zoning district (AgNRL) at the rate of one
residential unit per 40 acres of farmland, or at the rate of one residential unit per county certified
lot of record for development.
"Directional sign" means any sign that is limited to the purpose of providing direction and/
or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Directional signs typically indicate entrances,
exits, one-way circulation, drive-up windows, or provide similar types of information.
"Director" means the community development director or designee.
"District" or "zone" means a zoning district as described in chapter 17.05 BMC or as shown on
the city's adopted zoning map.
"Double-faced sign" means a sign with two faces, back to back.
"Drive aisle" means a vehicle access path abutting, and providing access to, no more than two
rows of parking spaces.
"Driveway" means an area improved with an all-weather driving surface providing vehicle
access to a single dwelling unit from a public or private street or alley in accordance with
applicable city standards and requirements. This term does not include public or private streets.
"Driveway, shared" or "shared driveway" means an area improved with an all-weather driving
surface providing primary vehicle access from a public or private street or alley in accordance
with applicable city standards and requirements. A shared driveway may serve up to four
individual dwellings or provide access to no more than two drive aisles. This term does not
include alleys or public or private streets. More information on driveways and access
requirements is located in chapter 17.85 BMC.
Duplex. See "dwelling" definitions.
"Dwelling" or "dwelling unit" means a building, or a portion of a building, providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one family or housekeeping unit. Dwellings are differentiated from
transient accommodations by providing a permanent, nontransient residence or place of
habitation.
1. "Dwelling, accessory," "accessory dwelling unit," or "ADU" means a building, or a portion
of a building, used as a self-contained dwelling that is secondary and subordinate to a
primary detached or horizontally attached dwelling. Accessory dwellings may be either
attached or detached. An attached accessory dwelling is located within the primary
dwelling. A detached dwelling is located in a detached accessory building located on the
same lot as the primary dwelling.
2. "Dwelling, attached" or "attached dwelling unit" means a dwelling unit located in a
building that contains other dwelling units or any structure where multiple dwellings share
common walls or are located on top of, or below, one another. This term includes duplexes,
horizontally attached dwellings, and multiunit buildings.
a. "Duplex" means a building containing two attached dwelling units. The dwellings in
a duplex may share common walls or one unit may be located above the other.
b. "Dwelling, horizontally attached" means a building containing three or more dwelling
units where the individual dwelling units are separated by common walls and where
no unit is located above or below another unit. Horizontally attached dwellings
include townhomes, row houses, and other similar residential buildings. This term
shall have the same meaning as, and may be used interchangeably with, the terms
"townhouse," "townhome," and "row house."
c. "Multiunit building" means a building, or a portion of a building, containing three or
more dwelling units. A multiunit building contains dwellings located above or below
one another. Examples of multiunit buildings include apartments, condominiums, and
multifamily buildings. This term shall have the same meaning as, and may be used
interchangeably with, the terms "multifamily building" and "multifamily dwelling(s)"
but does not include horizontally attached dwellings or duplexes as defined in this
chapter.
i. "Multiunit building, small" means a multiunit building containing up to four
dwelling units.
ii. "Multiunit building, medium" means a multiunit building containing five to
eight dwelling units.
iii. "Multiunit building, large" means a multiunit building containing more than
eight dwelling units.
3. "Dwelling, cottage" or "cottage dwelling unit" means a small detached dwelling unit
located in an approved cottage development.
4. "Dwelling, detached" or "detached dwelling unit" means a single dwelling unit occupying
a single detached building. A detached dwelling may also include an attached accessory
dwelling unit as defined in this chapter.
5. "Dwelling, small lot" means a small detached dwelling located in an approved small lot
development.
"E"
"Eating and drinking establishment" means a retail sales and service use in which food and/
or beverages are prepared and sold at retail for immediate consumption. Eating and drinking
establishments may include on-site brewing, distilling, baking, and kitchen facilities.
1. "Eating and drinking establishment, small" means an eating and drinking establishment
with a floor area of 1,000 square feet or less.
2. "Eating and drinking establishment, large" means an eating and drinking establishment
with a floor area of more than 1,000 square feet.
"Electric sign" means any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical energy.
"Electronic message sign or center" means an electrically activated changeable sign whose
variable message capability can be electronically programmed. The electronic sign includes
text and/or graphic messages that may change every few seconds. Advertising messages may
contain words, phrases, sentences, symbols, trademarks and logos. See BMC § 17.95.120 for
requirements regarding electronic signs.
"Emergency housing" or "emergency shelter" means temporary housing or shelter provided by
a governmental entity, or a private organization sanctioned by a governmental entity, to house
those persons who would otherwise be without housing or suitable shelter due to natural disaster,
personal circumstances, fire, economic calamity, disability, addiction, health issues, or other
similar circumstances. Emergency housing is typically provided in a congregate setting for stays
of limited duration and may include the provision of supportive services including, but not
limited to, food service, counseling, and screening for benefits eligibility.
"Emergency services" means fire, police, and emergency medical service (EMS) stations and
facilities.
"Enhanced pedestrian amenities" means convenience and safety improvements provided for
the benefit of pedestrians that exceed the minimum requirements identified in the Burlington
Municipal Code. Enhanced pedestrian amenities include plazas, raised crosswalks, benches,
pedestrian lighting, street trees, pedestrian signage, wider sidewalks, and awnings or overhangs
providing weather protection for pedestrians. Information on enhanced pedestrian amenities is
located in chapter 17.85 BMC.
"Essential public facility (EPF)" means any public facility or facilities owned or operated by a
unit of local or state government, public or private utility, transportation company, or any other
entity that provides a public service as its primary mission, and is difficult to site. EPFs include
those facilities listed in RCW 36.70A.200.
"Exterior lot" means a lot which directly abuts or adjoins at least one public or private street.
"Exterior sign" means any sign placed outside a building.
"F"
"Facade" means the exterior wall face of a building, extending from the ground to the top of the
parapet or eaves, but not including any portion of the roof. Each side of a building (i.e., each
architectural elevation) is considered one facade (see Figure 4). For buildings with more than
one occupant, the facade for each occupant shall be that portion of the exterior wall face between
the points where the interior walls between tenants intersect with the exterior wall.
Figure 4. Facade
"Family" means a person, or two or more persons, related by blood or marriage or law living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling. In addition, the following shall be
included in the definition of family pursuant to the requirements of state and/or federal law:
1. Adult family homes licensed pursuant to RCW 70.128.150;
2. Foster homes for the placement of the disabled, or expectant mothers in a residential
setting including, but not limited to, foster family homes licensed pursuant to chapter 74.15
RCW, community group care facilities licensed pursuant to chapter 74.15 RCW and crisis
residential centers pursuant to chapter 13.32A RCW;
3. Consensual living arrangements of the disabled protected pursuant to the Federal Fair
Housing Act amendments; and
4. A housekeeping unit as defined in this chapter.
Secure community transition facilities, as defined in chapter71.09 RCW, are not included in the
definition of "family."
"Family day care home" means a residential dwelling used by a family day care provider
to provide day care services in accordance with the provisions of RCW 36.70A.450 and
43.215.010.
"Family day care provider" means a child care provider who regularly provides early childhood
education and early learning services for not more than 12 children in the provider's home in the
family living quarters.
Flashing Sign. See "animated sign, electrically activated."
"Floor area" means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building or buildings,
measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls and from the centerline of division walls.
Floor area shall include: basement space, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, mechanical
equipment rooms or attic spaces with headroom of seven feet, six inches or more, penthouse
floors, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches. Floor area shall not include:
accessory water tanks and cooling towers, mechanical equipment or attic spaces with headroom
of less than seven feet, six inches, exterior steps or stairs, terraces, breezeways and open spaces.
"Footprint" means the area covered by a building or structure.
"Foster family home" means a dwelling unit used as a foster family home as defined in WAC
388-25-010 and chapter 74.13 RCW.
"Freestanding sign" means a sign principally supported by a structure affixed to the ground,
and not supported by a building, including signs supported by one or more columns, poles or
braces placed in or upon the ground. Freestanding signs include those signs otherwise known as
pedestal signs, pole signs, pylon signs, and monument signs.
Figure 5. Freestanding Sign
"Frontage (building)" means the length of an exterior building wall or structure of a single
premises oriented to the public way or other properties that it faces as determined by the
community development director or designee.
"Fueling station" or "gas station" means an automotive retail sales and service use where the
primary use of the property is the sale of fuel for motorized vehicles or the provision of access to
electric vehicle charging stations. This definition does not include charging stations associated
with a primary permitted use, the addition of charging stations to a parking area serving a
primary permitted use, or charging stations associated with publicly owned on-street or off-street
parking areas.
"G"
"Government agency" means any state or local governmental body, commission, department,
or officer, including, but not limited to, state agencies, cities, towns, counties, political
subdivisions, public utility districts, public corporations, and special purposes districts. This term
shall also include the United States government, federal agencies, and tribal governments unless
doing so would conflict with federal preemption or tribal sovereignty.
"Guest cottage" or "guest house" means a detached accessory building secondary and
subordinate to a dwelling unit used by the family occupying the dwelling unit for the purpose of
housing members of the family or guests. A guest cottage does not contain a kitchen or cooking
facilities and is not used as a separate dwelling unit. This term does not include accessory
dwelling units as defined in this chapter which may contain kitchens or cooking facilities and
which may be used as separate dwelling units.
"Guyed tower" means a wireless communication support structure which is usually over 100 feet
tall, which consists of metal crossed strips or bars and is steadied by wire guys in a radial pattern
around the tower. Guyed towers are often constructed in rural areas and are used to support
antennas and related equipment.
"H"
"Health care facility," "medical service" or "outpatient clinic" means a building, or a portion of a
building, containing offices for providing medical, dental, immediate care clinics, or psychiatric
services not involving overnight housing of patients. This term does not include hospitals or
nursing homes as defined in this chapter.
"Height of sign" or "sign height" means the vertical distance from the adjacent ground level to
the highest point of a sign or, in the case of freestanding signs, to any vertical projection thereof
including its supporting columns.
"Heliport" means an area or facility for the landing or takeoff of rotary-wing aircraft. This term
does not include runways or facilities for fixed-wing aircraft.
"Holographic display" means any display that creates a three-dimensional image through
projection.
"Home occupation" means an occupation or profession which is customarily incidental to or
carried on in a dwelling unit and not one in which the use of the premises as a dwelling place is
largely incidental to the occupation carried on, and which occupation is carried on by a member
of the family residing within the dwelling place.
"Hospital" means a building designed and used for the medical and surgical diagnosis, treatment
and housing of persons under the care of doctors and nurses. Rest homes, nursing homes,
convalescent homes and clinics are not included.
"Hotel" or "motel" means a building, or a portion of a building, designed or used to provide
transient accommodations in exchange for compensation and consisting of three or more lodging
units. An eating and drinking establishment and accessory shops and services catering to the
general public may be provided as accessory uses. This definition does not include institutions
housing persons under legal restraint, requiring medical attention or care, or facilities providing
emergency housing.
"Housekeeping unit" means one household where all the members have common access to and
common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit, and household
activities and responsibilities such as meals, chores, expenses, and maintenance of the premises
are shared or carried out according to a household plan or other customary method. If the
dwelling unit is rented, the household members must jointly occupy the unit under a single lease
in order to be considered a housekeeping unit. This term does not include boarding or rooming
houses as defined in this chapter where rooms within a dwelling unit are rented or leased to
individuals under separate leases.
"I"
"Illegal sign" means a sign that does not meet the requirements of this chapter and has not
received legal nonconforming status.
"Illuminated sign" means a sign characterized by the use of artificial light, either projecting
through its surface(s) (internally illuminated); or reflecting off its surface(s) (externally
illuminated).
"Impervious surface" means a hard surface which either prevents or retards the entry of water
into the soil mantle as under natural conditions prior to development, and/or a hard surface
area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of
flow from the flow present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious
surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops and eaves, walkways, patios, decks (both
covered and open slat construction shall both be considered impervious), driveways, parking lots
or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads, rockeries and oiled macadam or other
surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface and storm water runoff. Open,
uncovered storm water retention and detention facilities shall not be considered impervious
surfaces for purposes of this definition. For purposes of calculating impervious surface coverage
and demonstrating compliance with this title, the following impervious surfaces shall be
included at a ratio of 50 percent:
1. "Permeable paving"means pervious concrete, porous asphalt, permeable pavers, grass grid,
or other forms of pervious or porous paving material intended to allow the passage of
water through the pavement section. Permeable paving often includes an aggregate base
that provides structural support and acts as a storm water reservoir.
2. "Open slatted decking"means a deck surface constructed of boards with intermittent gaps
that allow water to pass through to the surface below. Only open, uncovered decks installed
over a permeable surface shall be included in impervious surface calculations at a 50
percent ratio. Covered decks, or decks installed over an impermeable surface, shall be
considered an impervious surface and included in all coverage calculations accordingly.
3. "Green roof" or "vegetated roof"means a roof, or a portion of a roof, consisting of
waterproofing material, growing medium or soil, and vegetation used in place of or over
the top of a conventional roof. Green roofs provide storm water management by capturing,
filtering, and evaporating rainfall.
"Industrial, high impact" means a use or activity that may generate significant emissions or
impacts perceptible beyond the site boundaries that cannot be mitigated or are difficult or
impractical to mitigate. High impact industrial uses and activities may also involve the
production, processing, handling, storage, or disposal of hazardous or dangerous substances or
materials. Such uses and activities include, but are not limited to:
1. Animal and food processing including slaughterhouses, the tanning and dressing of hides,
curing, canning, and processing meat and seafood, or pickling and brining;
2. Bulk storage, processing, production, or refining of oil, gas, petroleum and petroleum
products, butane, chemicals, shellac, varnish, turpentine, paper, pulp, rubber from crude
material;
3. Rock crushing plants;
4. Concrete mixing and batching plants, including ready-mix concrete facilities;
5. Production, processing, or recycling of metal;
6. Disposal, processing, or storage of solid waste including transfer and recycling facilities;
7. Commercial composting and production of mulch, bark, or wood chips;
8. Truck stops.
"Industrial, major" or "heavy industrial" means a use or activity involving the transformation
of materials and substances into new products including additive or subtractive processes,
construction, testing, and assembly of component parts and the blending of materials such as
lubricating oils, plastics, or resins. Major industrial uses and activities may generate external
emissions such as smoke, objectionable odors, noise, vibrations, or nuisances which may be
perceptible beyond the site boundaries but which can be mitigated to a level of nonsignificance
through the application of appropriate permit conditions. Major industrial uses and activities may
involve the use of large outdoor areas for manufacturing, assembly, or material processing. Such
uses and activities include, but are not limited to:
1. Manufacturing, processing, blending, and packaging of lime, gypsum, abrasives, chalk,
pumice, clay and cement products such as tile, pipe, brick, etc.;
2. Manufacturing and assembly of automotive and aerospace vehicles;
3. Manufacturing paints, printing ink, and leather goods;
4. Basic wood processing including sawmills, planning mills, veneering and laminating
woods, processing, or production of firewood, and the production of engineered wood
products such as trusses, beams, and panels;
5. Commercial laundries;
6. Enameling, galvanizing, and electroplating;
7. Bulk material sales and storage;
8. Repair and servicing of heavy equipment and trucks;
9. Manufacturing, processing, blending and packaging of the following:
a. Drugs, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, and cosmetics;
b. Food and kindred products, such as confectionery products, chocolate, cereal
breakfast food, bakery products, paste products, fruits and vegetables, beverages,
prepared food specialties (such as coffee, dehydrated and instant food, extracts, spices
and dressings) and similar products;
c. Dairy products and byproducts such as milk, cream, cheese and butter, including the
processing and bottling of fluid milk, and cream and wholesale distribution;
d. Soaps, detergents, and other basic cleaning and cleansing materials;
e. Mineral products.
"Industrial, minor" or "light industrial" means a use or activity involving the assembly of
goods or products from pre-manufactured materials or components, the repair, servicing, or
sale of goods or products, and the processing or preparation of food and beverage products
for off-site consumption. Minor industrial activities can be performed with minimal adverse
impact on, and pose no special hazard to, the environment or community. Minor industrial uses
and activities are differentiated from major industrial activities by taking place entirely within
an enclosed building and by not generating external emissions such as smoke, objectionable
odors, noise, vibrations, or nuisances outside the building where the use or activity takes place.
Minor industrial uses and activities may involve outdoor sales or storage but do not involve
outdoor manufacturing, assembly, or material processing. Examples of minor industrial uses and
activities include, but are not limited to:
1. Assembly, repair, and servicing of mechanical, automotive, marine, contractor's or
builder's equipment and supplies (other than heavy vehicle and equipment repair);
2. Assembly, repair, and servicing of electrical and electronic equipment and products;
3. Commercial bakeries and kitchens not associated with an eating and drinking
establishment;
4. Breweries and distilleries not associated with an eating and drinking establishment;
5. Commercial printers and publishing companies (not including retail photocopying and
printing services);
6. Assembly, repair, and servicing of scientific, medical, and precision instruments and
equipment;
7. Repair and servicing of bulky items including, but not limited to, small engines, lawn and
garden equipment, appliances, commercial and industrial electronics and controls, pumps
and hydraulic equipment, marine equipment and engines, passenger vehicles, boats, HVAC
equipment, and tools;
8. Precision machine and mechanical work including rebuilding and servicing engines,
transmissions, and similar mechanical components;
9. Cold storage plants.
"Informational sign" means a single- or double-faced sign intended primarily for the safety and
convenience of the public or to ensure the orderly operation of the site, including but not limited
to signs designating restrooms, address numbers, hours of operation, business directories, help
wanted, public telephones, and instructions regarding parking.
"Inoperable vehicle" means a car, truck or van that cannot be started and moved under its own
power. A vehicle that is not currently licensed, including a recreational vehicle or trailer that is
designed for travel on the public roads, is also considered an inoperable vehicle.
"Internal access street" means a street providing vehicle and pedestrian access within a
development or parking area. Internal access streets provide access to three or more drive aisles.
Interior Lot. See "lot" definitions.
"Interior sign" means any sign placed within a building, but not including window signs as
defined by this chapter. Interior signs, with the exception of window signs as defined, are not
regulated by this chapter.
"J"
"Junk storage" means the temporary or permanent storage outdoors of junk, waste, discarded,
salvaged or used materials, wrecked or inoperable vehicles, or vehicle parts. This definition
shall include, but not be limited to, the storage of used lumber, scrap, metal, tires, household
garbage, furniture, and inoperable machinery, and as further defined in the current edition of the
International Fire Code. See also chapter 8.12 BMC, Nuisances.
"Junk yard" means a lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used for junk storage, the collection,
storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material; or for the collecting,
dismantling, storage, salvaging or sale of parts of machinery or vehicles not in running condition.
"K"
Kennel. See "pet boarding" definition.
"L"
"Land use" means the type of use activity occurring on a land parcel or within a building situated
upon a land parcel.
"Land use permit" means a document issued by the city which documents or authorizes a
particular use or development. A land use permit formally documents the city's land use decision
and may establish, or document, the conditions and restrictions applicable to the use or
development.
"Lattice tower" means a wireless communication support structure which consists of metal
crossed strips or bars to support antennas and related equipment.
"Lodging unit" means a room or a group of interconnected rooms, intended for sleeping,
that is rented on a short-term basis to guest(s) to provide transient accommodation and is
individually designated by number, letter, or other means of identification. Lodging units may
contain cooking facilities; however, this definition does not include long-term, nontransient
accommodations such as dwellings or boarding houses.
"Lot" means a single unit of land having fixed boundaries, no matter how legally described.
1. "Lot, corner"means a lot at the junction of, and fronting on, two or more intersecting streets.
A corner lot has a front lot line and a street side lot line.
2. "Lot, illegal"means a lot, tract, parcel, or site created in violation of applicable zoning and
platting regulations.
3. "Lot, interior"means a lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.
4. "Lot, legal"means a lot, tract, parcel, or site created in compliance with the zoning and
platting regulations in effect at the time of its establishment or creation. This term also
includes illegally created lots that are subsequently recognized by the city as separate lots
consistent with the requirements of Title 16 BMC and chapter 57.17 RCW.
"Lot area" means the area of a lot contained within the lot lines. Lot area includes areas within
easements, submerged lands, and wetland areas. For purposes of determining compliance with
this title the city may require that lot area(s) be calculated by a licensed land surveyor.
"Lot depth" means the mean dimension of the lot from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
"Lot line" means a line or boundary which separates a lot, tract, parcel, or site from another
lot, tract, parcel or site, or from an adjoining public street or right-of-way. For purposes of
compliance with this title the city may require that the location of lot lines be determined by a
licensed land surveyor.
1. "Front lot line"means the lot line parallel to and abutting a public or private street. For
interior lots, or lots with more than one street frontage, the front lot line shall be side which
provides the primary means of access to the lot. If a lot has frontage on a street and an alley,
the property line adjoining the alley shall not be considered a front lot line regardless of the
point of access.
2. "Rear lot line"means the lot line which is opposite from and generally parallel to the front
property line.
3. "Side lot line"means any lot line other than the front line or rear lot line. Generally a side
property line is perpendicular to and connects the front and rear property lines.
4. "Street side lot line"means a lot line, other than a front lot line, which adjoins a public or
private street.
"Lot width" means the dimension across the lot between the side lot lines at the front setback
line.
"Low impact development" or "LID" means a storm water and land use management strategy
that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage,
evaporation, and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site
planning, and distributed storm water management practices that are integrated into a project
design. Low impact development features, practices, and techniques include bioretention, rain
gardens, permeable pavements, roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth,
vegetated or green roofs, minimum excavation foundations, and water reuse.
"M"
"Macro facility" means an attached wireless communication facility which consists of antennas
equal to or less than 15 feet in height or a parabolic antenna up to one meter (39.37 inches) in
diameter and with an area not more than 100 square feet in the aggregate as viewed from any
one point.
"Manufactured home" means a single-family dwelling unit built in accordance with regulations
adopted under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.) and (RCW43.22.335). This term includes modular homes as
defined in this chapter but does not include mobile homes. This term also does not include
recreational vehicles, park models, trailers, and other similar vehicles which are licensed for use
on public roads, capable of being licensed for use on public roads, or designed and constructed
to be licensed for use on public roads. Only structures which are certified by the state of
Washington or federal government for use as a permanent habitable dwelling are included in this
definition.
"Manufactured home park" means an area of land occupied or designed for the occupancy of two
or more manufactured homes.
"Marijuana processor" means a person licensed by the State Liquor and Cannabis Board to
process marijuana into usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products, package and label
usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products for sale in retail outlets, and sell usable
marijuana and marijuana-infused products at wholesale to marijuana retailers.
"Marijuana producer" means a person licensed by the State Liquor and Cannabis Board to
produce and sell marijuana at wholesale to marijuana processors and other marijuana producers.
"Marijuana retailer" means a person licensed by the State Liquor and Cannabis Board to sell
usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products in a retail outlet.
"Mean depth" of a lot is the depth of such lot measured on a line approximately perpendicular to
the fronting street and midway between the side lines of such lot.
"Medical service" means a retail sales and service use in which health care for humans is
provided on an outpatient basis including, but not limited to, offices for doctors, dentists,
chiropractors, and other health care practitioners.
"Meeting facility" means an assembly use such as a church, community building, or fraternal
organization where people gather for meetings, lectures, religious services, instruction, debates,
ceremonies, or other similar events. Meeting facilities do not include "commercial
entertainment" as defined in this chapter. Meeting facilities are differentiated from commercial
entertainment by primarily providing meeting space for a membership group or association on a
private, not for profit basis.
1. "Meeting facility, small"means a meeting facility with a ground floor area of 2,500 square
feet or less and a total floor area of 5,000 square feet or less.
2. "Meeting facility, large"means a meeting facility with a ground floor area of more than
2,500 square feet or a total floor area in excess of 5,000.
3. "Meeting facility, public"means a public facility intended to accommodate public
meetings, events, and gatherings such as a city hall, court, hearing rooms, auditoriums,
community center, or theatre.
"Mini commercial child day care center" or "mini commercial day care" means a commercial
child day care center that provides services to not more than 12 children at any one time.
"Mobile home" means a factory built dwelling unit that does not meet current state or federal
standards for factory built dwellings, modular homes, or manufactured homes. This definition
does not include manufactured or modular homes as defined in this chapter or site built homes
constructed in accordance with city building code requirements. Mobile homes may not be
placed within the city of Burlington; however, existing legally established mobile homes shall
be considered a nonconforming use and shall be subject to the nonconforming standards set forth
in chapter 17.100 BMC.
"Modular home" means factory built housing as defined by RCW 43.22.450(3) which has been
approved by the Department of Labor and Industries in accordance with RCW 43.22.455.
"Modulation" means an architectural technique for breaking up the apparent bulk of a structure's
continuous exterior walls or facade. Modulation involves stepping back or projecting forward
portions of the facade within specified intervals of width and depth.
"Monopole I" is a wireless communication facility which consists of a support structure, the
height of which shall not exceed 60 feet.
"Monopole II" is a wireless communication facility which consists of a wireless communications
support structure greater than 60 feet in height erected to support wireless communication
antennas and connecting appurtenances.
"Monument sign" means a ground-mounted, fixed sign. The base (not included in the sign
surface area calculation) is attached to the ground as a wide base of solid construction.
Figure 6. Monument Sign
"Multiple-tenant development" means a group of structures housing at least one retail business,
office, commercial venture, or independent or separate part of a business or a single structure
containing more than one business with separating walls and at least one outside access for each
business which shares a common lot, access, and/or parking facility.
Multiunit Building or Multifamily Dwelling. See definition under "dwelling."
"N"
"Noncommercial public service sign" means a noncommercial sign devoted to religious,
charitable, cultural, governmental, or educational messages including, but not limited to, the
advertising of events sponsored by a governmental agency, a school, church, civic or fraternal
organization or other organizations.
"Nonconforming lot" means a lot which was legally established but which does not conform to
current zoning or development regulations including any applicable standards for width, depth,
or area. For purposes of interpreting this definition, "legally established" means the lot was
created in compliance with the zoning and platting regulations, if any, in effect at the time the
lot was created. A lot may also be considered a legal nonconforming lot if it is subsequently
recognized by the city as a separate lot consistent with applicable municipal code requirements
and Washington State law.
"Nonconforming structure" means a structure which was lawfully established but which does not
conform to current zoning or development regulations. A structure shall be considered lawfully
established if it conformed to the applicable zoning and development regulations in effect at the
time it was built or established. This includes the requirement to obtain city approvals or permits.
A structure shall also be considered lawfully established if a permit for the structure has been
granted and has not expired. Subsequent expansions or modifications of a legally established
structure shall conform to all applicable zoning and development regulations in effect at the time
of the modification or expansion. Specific regulations governing nonconforming structures can
be found in chapter 17.100 BMC.
"Nonconforming use" means the use of land or a structure for a purpose which was lawful at the
time the use was established or initiated but which does not now conform to currently applicable
zoning or development regulations. A use shall be considered lawfully established if it was
consistent with all of the applicable zoning and development regulations in effect at the time it
was established or initiated. This includes the requirement to obtain city approvals or permits.
A use shall also be considered lawfully established if a permit authorizing the use has been
granted and has not expired. Subsequent expansions or modifications of a legally established use
shall conform to all applicable zoning and development regulations in effect at the time of the
modification or expansion. Specific regulations governing nonconforming uses can be found in
chapter 17.100 BMC.
"Nuisance tree" means any tree which, in the opinion of an arborist, is causing or is likely to
cause significant damage to a street, sidewalk, above or below ground utilities, or building, that
cannot be mitigated without removal of the tree.
"Nursing home" or "convalescent home" means a facility licensed by the state of Washington
providing 24-hour supervised nursing care, personal care, therapy, nutrition management,
organized activities, social services, room, board, and laundry for persons requiring regular
medical attention by reason of chronic illness or infirmity, but excluding surgical or emergency
medical services. This definition excludes hospitals, multifamily dwellings, boarding houses,
and hotels as defined in this chapter.
1. "Nursing home, small"means a nursing home with eight beds or less.
2. "Nursing home, large"means a nursing home with more than eight beds.
"O"
"Off-premises sign" means a sign which displays a message relating to a use of property or sale
of goods or services at a location other than that on which the sign is located.
"Office" means a commercial use which provides administrative, contractors, professional or
customer services to individuals, businesses, institutions and/or government agencies in an office
setting.
1. "Administrative office"means an office use in which services are provided to customers
primarily by phone or mail, by going to the customer's home or place of business, or on
the premises by appointment; or in which customers are limited to holders of business
licenses. Examples of services provided include, but are not limited to, general contracting,
janitorial and housecleaning, legal, architectural, data processing, broadcasting companies,
administrative offices or businesses, unions or charitable organizations, and wholesalers
and manufacturer's representatives' office. Administrative offices may include accessory
storage, but not the storage of building materials, contractor's equipment or items, other
than samples, for wholesale sale.
2. "Customer service office"means an office use in which on-site customer services are
provided in a manner which encourages walk-in clientele and in which generally an
appointment is not needed to conduct business. Examples include branch banks, travel
agencies, airline ticket offices, brokerage firms, real estate offices, and government
agencies which provide direct services to clients.
3. "Professional office"means a small scale office used as a place of business by licensed
professionals, or persons in other generally recognized professions, which use training or
knowledge of a technical, scientific or other academic discipline as opposed to manual
skills, and which do not involve outside storage or fabrication, or on-site sale or transfer of
commodity. This term includes office space for lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects,
consultants, and other similar professions.
"On-premises sign" means a sign which displays a message which is directly related to the use
of the property on which it is located.
"Outdoor storage" means the keeping of materials, supplies, equipment, machinery, or the long
term storage of vehicles outdoors or in a building without walls.
"Outdoor vending machine" shall mean a mechanical device located on the outside of a building
that provides a product or service to the public for compensation, including but not limited
to drink dispensers, food dispensers, movie rental or other product vending machines. The
definition shall also include freestanding automated teller machines that are not on the same
property as the financial institution. For purposes of this chapter, news boxes, pay phones, youth
amusement rides, and bottled soda, juice or water machines shall not be deemed to be outdoor
vending machines.
"P"
"Parking column" means two parking rows abutting one another and arranged back to back.
"Parking lot" or "parking area" means an area, or a portion of a development site, established
for the purpose of accommodating parking spaces. Parking lots include both individual parking
spaces and any associated drive aisles and circulation areas.
"Parking row" means a row of abutting parking spaces arranged alongside one another.
"Parking space" means a space used to temporarily park an operable motor vehicle and having
access to a public street or alley. This term does not include a space used for the storage of a
junk, wrecked, or inoperable vehicle.
"Pedestrian scale lighting" means outdoor lighting fixtures used to illuminate sidewalks and
pedestrian paths with a scale and intensity suitable for pedestrians. Pedestrian scale lighting is
mounted no higher than 14 feet above the surrounding grade and includes freestanding fixtures
(pole lights), lighted bollards, and building-mounted lights.
"Permitted use" means any use authorized or permitted alone or in conjunction with another use
in a specific district and subject to the limitations of the regulations of such use district.
Personal and Household Retail Sales and Service. See "retail" definition.
"Personal and household storage" means a building, group of buildings or other facility having
compartments, rooms, spaces, containers or other type of units that are individually leased,
rented, sold or otherwise contracted for by customers for the storage of personal or household
goods or property, and where the facility owner/operator has limited access to the units. For
purposes of this title, "self-service storage facility" shall be considered synonymous with self-
storage warehouse, self-storage facility, mini-warehouse or mini-storage. This term does not
include warehouses and freight distribution facilities.
"Personal services" means a use where personal services are provided and goods accessory to
the provision of such services may be sold. This term includes beauty salons, barber shops,
consumer dry cleaning services and laundromats, jewelry and watch repair, tailors, tattoo shops,
small electronic device repair, pet grooming, and other similar businesses.
"Pet boarding" means any use or property where seven or more pets or more than four dogs
are kept and any use where daytime or overnight care or boarding services are provided for
household pets.
1. "Pet boarding, day care"means a type of pet boarding where care is provided to household
pets during the day and where pet training or grooming services may also be provided but
does not include breeding or overnight boarding.
2. "Pet boarding, overnight" or "kennel"means a type of pet boarding where overnight care
is provided to household pets and where pet training or grooming services may also be
provided. This term also includes the breeding of household pets and the keeping of more
than one litter of unweaned pups.
"Placement of a recreational vehicle" means to store a wrecked, inoperable, or unlicensed
recreational vehicle on a lot for a period of more than 30 days, or to store a wrecked, inoperable,
or unlicensed recreational vehicle outdoors or on an unpaved surface.
"Primary residential building" or "principal residential building" means a building containing
one or more dwelling units. This term does not include accessory dwelling units as defined in
this chapter.
"Primary use (or principal use)" means the use for which a lot, structure or building, or the major
portion thereof is designed or actually employed.
"Private passenger transportation services" means a use where transportation services are
provided to paying customers. Private transportation services include bus and train terminals,
taxi dispatch centers, and other similar uses. This term does not include publicly operated
transportation services such as transit stops.
"Private school" means a privately operated school.
1. "Private school, small"means a privately operated school with a ground floor area no
greater than 2,500 square feet and a total floor area of 5,000 square feet or less.
2. "Private school, large"means a privately operated school with a ground floor area greater
than 2,500 square feet or a total floor area greater than 5,000 square feet.
"Public hearing" means a duly advertised public meeting called by the hearing examiner,
council, or commission of the city for the purpose of taking formal public comment, both in
favor and opposition to a proposed action.
"Public services" or "public facilities" means services, facilities, and uses owned, operated by,
or operated on land owned by a government agency.
1. "Public services, administrative and customer service"mean public offices, buildings and
facilities that provide administrative or institutional services or involve direct customer
interactions, such as an office, library, school, or city hall
2. "Public services, industrial"means a use or facility used for minor industrial purposes or
having characteristics similar to private uses categorized as industrial. Examples of such
uses include storage buildings, equipment repair shops, maintenance facilities, storage and
service yards, and sewage treatment plants.
"R"
Readerboard. See definition under "sign."
"Recreation facility, active" means areas, improvements, or structures dedicated to the
enjoyment of physical activities and recreational activities, including but not limited to organized
athletic events such as tennis, soccer, running, basketball and baseball; scheduled spectator
sports requiring large improved land areas, fields, courts, or facilities; and bicycle tracks or
courses. Active recreation facilities are differentiated from passive recreation facilities by the
level of site alterations and improvements required to support the activity. Active recreation
uses may require large parking areas, cleared and improved fields, large areas of impervious
surfaces, outdoor lighting, sound systems, spectator seating, large buildings, and other related
improvements.
"Recreation facility, passive" means areas or improvements dedicated to protecting or enhancing
critical area functions and values; providing opportunities for the public to enjoy the natural
environment or scenic landscapes; educational or research activities primarily related to the
natural environment; recreational activities that require no significant site alterations or physical
improvements such as trails, paths, viewing platforms, and interpretive signs. Passive recreation
facilities may include minor accessory improvements such as benches, picnic tables, ornamental
landscaping, community gardens, signage, and small parking areas.
"Receiving site" means the site in the recipient zoning district that will receive the increased
density by purchasing Burlington heritage credits at a set fee or transferring development rights
from the sending site. Receiving sites in the city of Burlington are further described in the MR-
NB, B-1, C-1 and R-3 zoning districts.
"Recreational vehicle" or "RV" means a structure or vehicle containing living space intended to
provide short-term transient accommodations for recreational purposes or travel and licensed for
use on public roads, designed to be licensed for use on public roads, or capable of being licensed
for use on public roads. This term includes trailers, campers, motor homes, park models, and
other similar vehicles but does not include manufactured homes as defined in this chapter. A
recreational vehicle shall not be considered, or used as, a permanent place of habitation, or as
sleeping quarters for periods of 30 days or more.
"Residential small lot," "residential small lot development," or "small lot development" means a
process by which lots, smaller than would normally be permitted, may be created through a short
subdivision or subdivision process.
"Related equipment" is all equipment ancillary to the transmission and reception of voice and
data via radio frequencies. Such equipment may include, but is not limited to, cable, conduit and
connectors.
"Retail," "retail sales and service," or "personal household retail sales and service" means a
commercial use in which goods are rented or sold at retail to the general public for direct
consumption and not for resale, or in which services are provided to individuals and/or
households. Merchandise may be bought as well as sold and may be processed as long as the
items processed are sold on the premises, and production is incidental or subordinate to the
selling, rental or repair of goods. This term does not include marijuana retailers.
1. "Retail sales and service, small scale"means a retail sales and service establishment with a
floor area of 1,000 square feet or less.
2. "Retail sales and service, medium scale"means a retail sales and service establishment with
a floor area greater than 1,000 square feet but less than 5,000 square feet.
3. "Retail sales and service, large scale"means a retail sales and service establishment with a
floor area of 5,000 square feet or more.
"Residential zone" means an area zoned RD or RA.
"Rezone" means an amendment to the official land use map to change the zone classification of
an area.
"S"
"Sales and rental of motorized vehicles" means an automotive retail sales and service use in
which motorized vehicles, such as cars, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles or motorcycles, or
related nonmotorized vehicles, such as trailers, are rented or sold.
"School" means an institution of learning, whether public or private, which offers instruction
in those courses of study required by the Washington Education Code or which is maintained
pursuant to standards required by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a
nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school or any
special institution of education, and also includes higher education institutions and vocational
schools, but does include health and fitness clubs or facilities that solely provide artistic or
musical instruction.
"Secure community transition facilities (SCTF)" means, under RCW 71.09.020, a residential
facility for persons civilly committed and conditionally released to a less restrictive alternative
under chapter 71.09 RCW. A secure community transition facility has supervision and security,
and either provides or ensures the provision of sex offender treatment services. Secure
community transition facilities include but are not limited to the facility established pursuant to
RCW 71.09.250 and any community-based facilities established under this chapter and operated
by the Washington State Secretary of Social and Health Services or under contract with the
Secretary.
"Sending site" means the site that is to be preserved as agricultural resource land by selling
or transferring its residential development rights to the Skagit farmland legacy program or
other entity approved by the Skagit farmland legacy program. Sending sites shall be maintained
permanently as agricultural lands and no structures may be built on the land. Sending sites may
not be in public ownership. If the sending site consists of more than one tax lot, the lots must be
contiguous. For purposes of this section, lots divided by a street are considered contiguous if the
lots would share a common lot line if the street was removed. See Map Exhibit A, attached to
the ordinance codified in this chapter, for land generally eligible as sending sites for the purpose
of this chapter.
"Service yard" or "storage yard" means an accessory yard or outdoor area used to store functional
equipment, operable vehicles, materials, or used for outdoor fabrication or processing of
materials. This term does not include junk storage, junk yards, or wrecking yards.
"Setback" means the space or distance required between a lot line and a building, structure, or
development. Required setback areas are intended to remain free of buildings and structures and
open to the sky as specified in this title. Setbacks may also be required between different and
incompatible uses.
1. "Front setback"means an open unoccupied space parallel and adjacent to the front property
line and extending from one side property line to the opposite side property line. No
building or structure shall be placed within or extend into a required front setback unless
explicitly authorized by this title.
2. "Rear setback"means an open, unoccupied space parallel and adjacent to the rear property
line and extending from one side property line to the opposite side property line. No
building or structure shall be placed within or extend into a required rear setback except as
explicitly authorized by this title.
3. "Side setback"means an open unoccupied space parallel and adjacent to a side property
line and extending from the front property line to the rear property line. Buildings and
structures shall not be placed within or extend into a required side setback except as
explicitly authorized by this title.
4. "Street setback"means an open unoccupied space parallel and adjacent to a public or private
street and extending from one side property line to the opposite side property line. No
building or structure shall be placed within or extend into a required street setback unless
explicitly authorized by this title. This definition does not include the front setback area
as defined in this title and is intended to be applied to property lines which adjoin or abut
streets when a lot has more than one street frontage.
Shared Driveway. See "driveway, shared."
"Sign" means all surfaces/structures (permitted, exempt, or prohibited) regulated by this chapter
that have letters, figures, designs, symbols, trademarks or devices intended to attract attention
to any activity, service, place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article,
machine or merchandise whatsoever.
1. "Sign, off-premises"means a sign which displays a message relating to a use of property or
sale of goods or services at a location other than that on which the sign is located.
2. "Sign, on-premises"means a sign which displays a message which is directly related to the
use of the property on which it is located.
3. "Sign, single-faced"means a sign with only one face, displaying content on only one side
and in only one direction.
4. "Sign, portable"means a movable sign that is not permanently attached to a structure or the
ground. Portable signs include A-frame signs and signs mounted on a portable base, but not
portable readerboards.
5. "Sign, projecting"means a building-mounted sign which projects past the face of a building
for the purpose of displaying the sign content in a direction other than parallel to the
building facade.
6. "Sign, readerboard"means a sign or part of a sign on which the letters are replaceable by
manual means, such as changing magnetic letters on a sign board.
7. "Sign, roof" or "roof-mounted sign"means a sign or sign structure erected above a roof,
parapet, canopy, or porte-cochere of a building or structure.
8. "Sign, traffic control"means a sign located in a public or private street right-of-way for
the purposes of traffic safety and control. Common traffic control signs include stop signs,
speed limits, and parking restrictions. Traffic control signs are not used for advertising or
commercial purposes.
9. "Sign, wayfinding"means a sign consistent with, and approved under, the city's adopted
wayfinding signage program.
Single-Family Dwelling. See definition for "dwelling, detached."
"Site area" means the total horizontal area within the property lines excluding external streets.
Small Lot Development or Residential Small Lot. See definition under "residential, small lot."
"Specified anatomical areas" means:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
2. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
"Specified sexual activities" means:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
"Story" means the part of a building lying between two floors or between the floor and ceiling of
the highest usable level in the building.
"Street" means a public or private thoroughfare which is consistent with the classification
scheme identified in chapter 12.28 BMC and which affords the principal means of access
to abutting properties, dwelling units, or commercial premises. This term does not include
"driveway" or "shared driveway" as defined in this chapter.
"Structure" means a combination of materials constructed and erected permanently on the
ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. Not included
are residential fences, retaining walls less than three feet in height, rockeries and similar
improvements of a minor character.
"T"
"Telecommunication micro facility" means an attached wireless communication facility which
consists of antennas equal to or less than four feet in height (except omnidirectional antennas
which may be up to six feet in height) and with an area of not more than 580 square inches in
the aggregate (e.g., one-foot diameter parabola or two-foot by one-and-one-half-foot panel) as
viewed from any one point. The permitted antenna height includes the wireless communication
facility support structure.
"Telecommunication mini facility" means an attached wireless communication facility which
consists of antennas equal to or less than 10 feet in height or a parabolic antenna up to one meter
(39.37 inches) in diameter and with an area of not more than 50 square feet in the aggregate as
viewed from any one point.
Topless Club. See definition under "adult entertainment use."
"Towing service" means the place of business of a tow truck operator as defined in chapter 46.55
RCW where vehicles may be impounded, stored or sold, but not disassembled or junked. This
term does not include wrecking yards or hulk haulers.
"Tract" means a lot created through a land division process that is designated and reserved for
a particular use or function such as open space, park land, stormwater management, utilities,
streets, access, or community buildings.
"Traffic control devices" means signs, signals, directional symbols, and similar devices
specifically intended to direct traffic to, from, and within a site.
"Trailer park" or "RV park" means a facility designed to accommodate recreational vehicles on
a temporary, transient, and recreational basis for periods of less than 30 days. This term does not
include manufactured home parks or emergency housing as defined in this chapter.
"Transient accommodations" means the provision of lodging units, room, board, or sleeping
space to guests on a short-term basis for periods of less than 30 days. This term does not include
multifamily dwellings or boarding houses as defined in this chapter.
"Transmission tower" is a freestanding structure, other than a building, on which communication
devices are mounted. Transmission towers may serve either as a major or minor communication
facility. Examples include, but are not limited to:
1. Monopoles;
2. Lattice towers;
3. Guyed towers.
Two-Family Dwelling or Duplex. See definition under "dwelling."
"U"
"Utilities" means utility lines and facilities related to the provision, distribution, collection,
transmission or disposal of water, storm and sanitary sewage, oil, gas, power, and telephone
cable, and includes facilities for the generation of electricity. This definition does not include
wireless communication facilities, or solid waste disposal/recycling facilities.
1. "Utilities, small"means small scale facilities serving local areas within the city, including
street lights, underground power lines, water, sewer, and stormwater facilities, fiber optic
cable, pump stations and hydrants, switching boxes, and other structures normally found
in a street right-of-way and necessary to serve abutting properties. Small utilities are
distinguished from medium and large utilities by being limited in scale and capacity
sufficient only to serve abutting properties and immediately surrounding areas. Small scale
utilities are not significantly larger than necessary to serve the forms and intensities of
development permitted in the zones in which they are located.
2. "Utilities, medium"means moderate scale facilities with the capacity to serve the entire
city or significant portions of the city, including subregional switching stations (115 kv
and smaller), and municipal sewer, water, and storm water facilities that do not otherwise
qualify as minor or major utilities.
3. "Utilities, large"means large scale facilities with either major above-ground visual impacts,
or serving a regional need such as 230 kv power transmission lines, natural gas
transmission lines, regional water storage tanks and reservoirs, regional water transmission
lines, sewer collectors and interceptors, and sewage and water treatment facilities.
"V"
"Variance" means a process for granting relief from certain provisions of this title. Variance
approval criteria and procedures are more fully described in BMC Title 14A.
Vehicle Charging Station. See definition under "charging station."
"Vehicle repair" means a use where motor vehicles are repaired or serviced.
1. "Vehicle repair, major" means an automotive retail sales and service use in which one or
more of the following activities are carried out:
a. Reconditioning of any type of motorized vehicle including any repairs made to
vehicles over 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight;
b. Collision services, including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair;
c. Overall painting of vehicles in a paint shop or major paint work;
d. Dismantling of motorized vehicles in an enclosed structure.
2. "Vehicle repair, minor" means an automotive retail sales and service use in which general
motor repair work is done as well as the replacement of new or reconditioned parts in
motorized vehicles of 10,000 pounds or less gross vehicle weight, but not including any
operation included in the definition of "major vehicle repair." Minor vehicle repair uses
typically include service stations, detail shops, mechanics, oil change establishments, or
businesses specializing in replacement of specific vehicle components such as batteries,
brakes, and exhaust systems.
"W"
"Walking advertisers" means persons carrying or wearing portable advertising signs or costumes
designed to advertise a business, event, sale or season/holiday with a permit describing location,
supervision and public safety.
"Warehouse" means a structure, room, or rooms for the storage of merchandise or commodities.
This term includes freight terminals and distribution facilities but does not include "personal
storage" facilities.
"Wireless communication facility" is an unstaffed facility for the transmission and reception
of low-power radio signals consisting of an equipment shelter or cabinet, a support structure,
antennas (e.g., omnidirectional, panel/directional or parabolic) and related equipment.
"Wireless communication support structure" is the structure erected to support wireless
communication antennas and connecting appurtenances. Support structure types include, but are
not limited to, stanchions, monopoles, lattice towers, wood poles or guyed towers.
"Wrecked vehicle" or "junk vehicle" means a vehicle which is disassembled or dismantled or a
vehicle which is acquired with the intent to dismantle or disassemble and never again to operate
as a vehicle, or a vehicle which has sustained such damage that its cost to repair exceeds the
fair market value of a like vehicle which has not sustained such damage, or a damaged vehicle
whose salvage value plus cost to repair equals or exceeds its fair market value, if repaired, or a
vehicle which has sustained such damage or deterioration that it may not lawfully operate upon
the highways of this state for which the salvage value plus cost to repair exceeds its fair market
value, if repaired; further, it is presumed that a vehicle is a wreck if it has sustained such damage
or deterioration that it may not lawfully operate upon the highways of this state. This term also
includes any vehicle meeting the definition of a junk vehicle under RCW 46.79.010.
"Wrecking yard" or "junk yard" means the buying, selling, or dealing in vehicles for the purpose
of wrecking, dismantling, disassembling, or substantially changing the form of a vehicle, or the
buying or selling of integral secondhand parts or component material thereof, in whole or in
part, or the dealing in secondhand vehicle parts. This term also includes hulk haulers, as defined
in chapter 46.79 RCW, and the storage of inoperable, wrecked, or junk vehicles except where
explicitly authorized in conjunction with a lawfully established vehicle repair facility.
"Y"
Yard. See "setback."
"Z"
"Zone" or "zoning district" means a zoning district as described in chapter 17.05 BMC or as
shown on the city's adopted zoning map.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.130 Off-premises signs.
Off-premises signs shall not be allowed except as herein provided:
A. Billboards (Outdoor Advertising Structures). New billboards shall not be allowed in any
zoning district.
B. Political Signs. Signs which support or oppose ballot measures, persons running for
political office, and other issues subject to a vote by the public may be allowed subject to
the following conditions:
1. Approval of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be placed;
2. Location. Such signs shall not be posted in state, county or city rights-of-way, on
telephone poles, traffic signs, or other public apparatus. Such signs shall observe the
corner vision requirements of this title, and shall not be situated in a manner which
creates a hazard;
3. Size. Signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in size as viewed from one direction;
4. Time Limit. Such signs shall not be posted more than four months before the affected
election, and shall be removed within one week after the election for which the sign
is posted.
C. Temporary Directional Signs. The intent of this provision is to allow the infrequent, and
not the regular, use of signs of a temporary nature. Off-premises directional signs of a
temporary nature such as those used to direct persons to open houses, garage sales, or
special events of short (two days') duration may be allowed subject to the following
conditions:
1. Any such sign which is visible from a state highway shall be subject to approval by
the State Department of Transportation.
2. All such signs shall comply with subsections (B)(1) through (3) of this section.
3. Time Limit. All such signs shall be removed at the end of the day on which the event,
open house or garage sale is conducted and shall not be used repeatedly, contrary to
the stated intent.
4. The city shall have the authority to immediately remove and dispose of any such sign
found to be in violation of this subsection.
D. Wayfinding Signage Program. The intent of this provision is to establish a city-managed
wayfinding sign program that provides directional and locational information to the general
public about places of general interest, such as tourist information services, school or public
recreational facilities, shopping malls, restaurants, lodging, business directories designed
to be compatible with the city's urban wayfinding program, central business or other special
districts, historic sites, and regional developments; or to provide information of a general
community nature, such as those found at city entrance locations identifying the city and
historic dates, or listing local service clubs and organizations or to provide business
identification for sites located on a dead-end street. Such signs may be allowed, subject to
the following:
1. Only signs located in a public right-of-way and installed and maintained by the city
of Burlington shall be permitted under this subsection (D).
2. In order to reduce visual clutter and maximize the benefits of the wayfinding program,
signs identifying individual points of interest shall be consolidated whenever possible
and all signs shall be consistent with the city's adopted wayfinding signage program.
3. Signs visible from, or located in the right-of-way of, a state highway shall be subject
to approval by the Washington State Department of Transportation.
4. Location. The location of wayfinding signs shall be approved by the city engineer.
Signs shall not be placed where they may cause a hazard, or obstruct the vision of any
driver.
5. Size. Signs identifying individual points of interest shall be no larger than necessary
to clearly inform or direct the public and shall be consistent with the city's urban
wayfinding signage program.
6. Illumination. May be indirectly illuminated.
7. Design. All such signs shall be designed using materials, colors, lettering and other
graphics consistent with the city's adopted wayfinding signage program.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.135 Prohibited signs.
A. Prohibited signs are subject to removal by the city at the owner's or user's expense.
Prohibited signs on public property may be summarily removed by the city. Prohibited
signs on private property shall be subject to code enforcement action for removal pursuant
to this section.
B. The following signs or displays are prohibited in all zones within the city, whether located
on public or private property, except those expressly permitted as temporary signs in BMC
§ 17.95.125:
1. Abandoned or obsolete signs;
2. Animated or moving signs;
3. Dilapidated, nonmaintained signs;
4. Flashing signs and strobe lights, holographic displays;
5. Inflatable advertising devices;
6. Mylar balloons;
7. Obstructing signs which obstruct or interfere with free access to or egress from a
required exit from a building or structure, or do not meet corner vision requirements;
8. Off-premises signs except those expressly allowed in this chapter;
9. Pennants, streamers, ribbons, spinners, whirlers, propellers, festoons, blinking lights,
or similar items that attract attention through movement, reflection or illumination;
10. Portable signs include any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently
affixed to the ground or to a structure or building. Examples of portable signs include
but are not limited to wire stake signs, A-frame, sandwich board signs and portable
readerboard signs. See BMC § 17.95.125(B) for exceptions;
11. Persons carrying or wearing portable advertising signs or costumes designed to
advertise a business. See BMC § 17.95.125(C) for exceptions;
12. Signs mounted on the tops of roofs, projecting above parapet walls, are prohibited,
except those explicitly authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)

17.95.140 Variances.
Relief from or modifications of the size limits of signs regulated by this chapter require a zoning
variance as provided in BMC § 14A.05.150.
(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 1933 § 1 (Exh. A), 2023)