18.16.010 Shoreline use and development tables.
The following tables indicate the allowable uses and shoreline development and some of the
standards applicable to those uses and development. Where there is a conflict between the chart
and the written provisions in this master program, the written provisions shall apply. Please note
that the severely limited list of uses is a result of the shoreline fronted by levees and the fact that
the land has been and continues to be acquired in public ownership for flood hazard mitigation.
The charts are coded according to the following legend:
KEY:
P = May be permitted although a shoreline permit may not be required
C = May be permitted as a conditional use only
X = Prohibited; the use is not permitted nor is it eligible for a variance or conditional
use permit
N/A = Not applicable
See also notes to tables following Table 3.
Table 1: Shoreline Use
Shoreline Environment
Urban
Shoreline Use Aquatic Natural Conservancy
Agriculture X X P – 1
Boating facilities P – 2,3 X C – 2,3
Commercial:
Water-dependent X – 9 X X – 9
Water-related, water- X X X
enjoyment
Non-water-oriented X X X
Flood hazard reduction P X – 11 P – 2
Industrial:
Water-dependent X X X
Water-related, water- X X X
enjoyment
Non-water-oriented X X X
Mining C – 3 X X
Parking (primary) X X X
Table 1: Shoreline Use
Shoreline Environment
Urban
Shoreline Use Aquatic Natural Conservancy
Parking (accessory) X X P
Recreation P – 9 P – 9 P – 9
Residential development X X X
Transportation – existing P – 2 P – 2 P – 2
corridors
Transportation – new corridors C – 4 C – 4 C – 4
Utilities (accessory) P P P
Utilities including wastewater P – 10 P – 10 P – 10
treatment plant
Wetland restoration and P – 2 P – 2 P – 2
maintenance
Table 2: Shoreline Modifications
Shoreline Environment
Urban
Shoreline Modification Aquatic Natural Conservancy
Shoreline Stabilization:
Beach or buffer restoration/ P – 5 P P
enhancement
Bioengineering P – 5,6 X P – 5,6
Revetments P – 5,6 X P – 1,5,6
Bulkheads P – 5,6 X P – 1,5,6
Breakwaters/jetties/rock P – 5,6 X P – 1,5,6
weirs/groins
Levees P X P – 1
Dredging C – 5 X X
Hazardous waste cleanup P P P
Fill C – 5,6 X P – 1,6
Piers, docks, buoys, floats P – 7 X P
§ 18.16.010 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.16.010
Table 3: Development Standards
Shoreline Environment
Urban
Development Standard Aquatic Natural Conservancy
Boating facilities
Water-dependent setback N/A N/A 0
Water-related building N/A N/A 50 – 8
setback
Recreational development
Water-dependent setback N/A N/A 0
Water-related, water- N/A N/A 70 – 8
enjoyment setback
Non-water-oriented setback N/A N/A 70 – 8
Building height limit N/A N/A 45 – 8
Parking (accessory)
Setback N/A N/A 70 – 8
Notes to Tables 1, 2 and 3:
1. The use or development is prohibited in Gages Slough urban conservancy, except as part
of a transportation improvement, utility installation or water quality enhancement project with
mitigation as prescribed in Appendices A and B.
2. Public access, as approved by the city, is a condition of development and substantial
development.
3. The use may be allowed provided it does not cause significant ecological impacts that cannot
be mitigated on site.
4. The use may be allowed providing there is no other feasible route or location.
5. The shoreline modification may be allowed only for environmental restoration/mitigation or
if the city determines that there will be a net increase in desired shoreline ecological functions.
6. Development for which a floodplain approval is required is prohibited in the floodway, other
than utility outfall structures authorized by the Corps of Engineers and levee construction to
maintain the structural integrity of critical infrastructure.
7. Piers or docks may be allowed only for public access or hand-carried vessels and only if
significant adverse ecological impacts are avoided.
8. The setback is measured from the ordinary high water mark and shall include a 50-foot
minimum strip of shoreline restoration measures and/or native vegetation plantings as approved
by the city plus a 20-foot-wide public access easement running parallel with the shoreline.
9. Commercial recreation facilities may be allowed as a water-dependent use or in support of
recreational facilities such as concession stands.
Notes to Tables 1, 2 and 3:
10. New utility production and processing facilities are prohibited unless it can be demonstrated
that no other practical option is available. The existing wastewater treatment plant and future
expansion is a permitted facility.
11. Only flood control physical elements such as levees or fill are prohibited. Other forms of
flood hazard reduction such as planning, monitoring and warning systems are allowed.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.015 Shoreline modifications.
A. Implementation Policy. Shoreline modifications are generally related to construction of a
physical element such as a dike, breakwater, dredged basin, or fill, but they can include
other actions such as clearing, grading, application of chemicals, or significant vegetation
removal. Shoreline modifications usually are undertaken in support of or in preparation for
a shoreline use; for example, fill (shoreline modification) required for a cargo terminal
(industrial use) or dredging (shoreline modification) to allow for a marina (boating facility
use). Shoreline modifications in Burlington are limited.
B. Regulations.
1. All new shoreline modifications must be in support or protection of an allowable
shoreline use or development that is in danger of loss or substantial damage or is
necessary for mitigation or enhancement and conforms to the provisions of this
master program. Except as otherwise noted, all shoreline modifications not associated
with a legally existing or an approved shoreline use are prohibited.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.020 Agriculture.
A. Implementation Policy. Agricultural activities on agricultural land are not regulated by this
shoreline master program. Only new agricultural activities on land not meeting the
definition of agricultural land, conversion of agricultural lands to other uses, and other
development on agricultural land that does not meet the definition of agricultural activities
is regulated by this shoreline master program.
Existing and ongoing agriculture shall be required to implement applicable standards and
practices through an individual farm plan based on the Field Office Technical Guides
(FOTG) administered by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of USDA. An
accountability and monitoring program shall be included in each plan. The farm
management plan shall be consistent with the Washington State Agricultural Strategy to
ensure agricultural practices are not negatively affecting water quality, quantity or salmon
habitat.
New development in support of agricultural activities shall be designed to minimize
impacts to shoreline environments, specifically, to prevent livestock intrusion into the
water; bank erosion; degradation of water quality from fertilizers, pesticides, and manure
into the water; and loss of shoreline vegetation. Standards or best management practices,
setbacks and vegetation management areas shall be addressed through individual farm
plans as above.
§ 18.16.020 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.16.030
B. Regulations by Environment for New Agricultural Activities on Land Currently Not
Meeting the Definition of Agricultural Land.
1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Agriculture is prohibited in the Gages Slough
urban conservancy. Agriculture is permitted in the Skagit River urban conservancy
subject to the following requirements:
a. Fencing livestock out of Skagit River, associated wetlands and all buffers;
b. Prohibit the practice of spraying liquid manure, the use of pesticides, herbicides
and organic fertilizers, and the cultivation of land within the buffers of the
Skagit River, associated wetlands and their buffers.
2. Natural Environment. Agriculture is prohibited.
3. Aquatic Environment. Agriculture is prohibited.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.030 Boating facilities.
A. Implementation Policy. Provisions shall be included to address potential impacts while
providing the public boating opportunities. Facilities shall be restricted to existing locations
with suitable environmental conditions, shoreline configuration, access, and neighboring
uses. Sewage pumpouts and wash-off stations shall be required where appropriate to meet
health requirements. Mitigation of visual and ecological impacts shall be required. Parking
impacts shall be mitigated. Live-aboards and covered moorage are prohibited.
At the time of adoption of the SMP, boating facilities in Burlington consist of one floating
dock moored by pilings that abuts the shoreline and is used as a landing or moorage place
for small water craft utilized for recreational purposes (e.g. private angling club facility),
and one public boat launch ramp.
Pier and dock construction should be restricted to the minimum size necessary to meet
the needs of the proposed use. Multiple-use and expansion of legally existing piers and
docks should be encouraged over the addition of new facilities. Joint-use facilities are
preferred over new single-use piers, docks, and floats. Piers and docks should be sited and
designed to avoid or minimize potentially significant ecological impacts, including impacts
on sediment movement, water circulation and quality, and fish and wildlife habitat. The
proposed size of the structure and intensity of use or uses of any pier or dock should be
compatible with the surrounding environment and land and water uses.
B. Regulations.
1. Marinas are prohibited.
2. Live-aboards and covered moorage is prohibited.
3. Sewage pumpouts, restrooms and wash-off stations shall be required where
appropriate to meet health requirements.
4. Pier and dock construction shall be restricted to the minimum size necessary to meet
the needs of the proposed use. Piers and docks shall be sited and designed to avoid or
minimize potentially significant ecological impacts, including impacts on sediment
movement, water circulation and quality, and fish and wildlife habitat.
C. Regulations by Environment.
1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Boating facilities are a shoreline conditional use
permit along the Skagit River. Boating facilities are prohibited in Gages Slough.
2. Natural Environment. Boating facilities are prohibited.
3. Aquatic Environment. Boating facilities are permitted subject to compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations and standards and the implementation policies
and regulations of this section.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.040 Commercial and industrial development.
A. Implementation Policy. No significant development other than critical infrastructure is
allowed along the Skagit River, and no development is allowed in the Gages Slough
wetland. Levee maintenance and improvement and transportation upgrades such as
replacing bridges are the only potential development activity and mitigation would be
required.
As stated in the regulations by environment, there is existing guide service that may utilize
the boat launch ramp, but there is no location available for commercial and industrial
development along the riverfront.
B. Regulations by Environment.
1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Commercial and industrial development is
prohibited except for commercial services related to recreational facilities.
2. Natural Environment. Commercial and industrial development is prohibited.
3. Aquatic Environment. Water-dependent commercial and industrial development is
prohibited except for water-taxi or guide service.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.050 In-stream structures.
A. Implementation Policies. The guidelines define an in-stream structure as a structure placed
by humans within a stream or river waterward of the ordinary high water mark that either
causes or has the potential to cause water impoundment or the diversion, obstruction, or
modification of water flow. In-stream structures may include those for hydroelectric
generation, irrigation, water supply, flood control, transportation, utility service
transmission, fish habitat enhancement, or other purpose.
In-stream structures are defined to include structures in wetlands and shall provide for the
protection and preservation of natural and cultural resources, including but not limited to
fish, wildlife, and water resources; critical areas; geohydrological processes; and natural
scenic vistas. The location and planning of in-stream structures shall give due consideration
to the full range of public interests, watershed functions and processes, and environmental
concerns, with special emphasis on protecting and restoring priority habitats and species.
§ 18.16.050 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.16.070
The only likely installations in the Skagit River shoreline area would be associated with a
transportation facility, data collection, flood control, or fish enhancement.
B. Regulations.
1. In-stream structures shall provide for the protection and preservation of safe surface
navigation, ecosystem-wide processes, ecological functions and cultural resources,
including but not limited to fish and fish passage, wildlife and water resources,
shoreline critical areas, hydrogeologic processes, and natural scenic vistas.
2. The location and planning of in-stream structures shall give due consideration to the
full range of public interests, watershed functions and processes, and environmental
concerns, with special emphasis on protecting and restoring priority habitats and
species.
C. Regulations by Environment.
1. Urban Conservancy Environment. In-stream structures including culverts and similar
structures are permitted to be located in Gages Slough.
2. Natural Environment. In-stream structures are permitted as a shoreline conditional
use.
3. Aquatic Environment. In-stream structures are permitted.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.060 Mining.
A. Implementation Policies. Mining shall not be allowed in unique and fragile areas and
excavation of sand, gravel and other minerals shall be done as required by the Washington
State Surface Mining Reclamation Act, chapter78.44 RCW.
B. Regulations.
1. Mining is prohibited in unique and fragile areas. When allowed it shall be in
compliance with the Washington State Surface Mining Reclamation Act, chapter
78.44 RCW.
C. Regulations by Environment.
1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Mining is prohibited.
2. Natural Environment. Mining is prohibited.
3. Aquatic Environment. Mining is prohibited except for gravel extraction as a shoreline
conditional use for specific quantities and specified locations. The removal of gravel
from the Skagit River shall be done only after a biological and geohydrological study
shows that sustainable extraction can take place without altering the natural processes
of gravel transport and there is no net loss of ecological functions. Fish and wildlife
resources shall be protected consistent with the Endangered Species Act and all
disturbed areas shall be reclaimed. Removal of gravel for flood management purposes
shall be consistent with the flood hazard mitigation plan.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.070 Recreational development.
A. Implementation Policies. The public shall be allowed to enjoy the waters of the state
through water-oriented recreation. Shoreline recreational facilities should be linked to other
recreational attractions by pedestrian and bicycle trails. In order to provide for a spectrum
of recreational needs and opportunities, recreational development must be consistent with
the parks and recreation comprehensive plan.
Location and design shall minimize environmental damage, and shall be designed to
improve natural habitat, whether on the shoreline or upland, to maximize the diversity of
habitat opportunities.
B. Regulations by Environment.
1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Recreational development is permitted. All non-
water-oriented recreational developments shall make provision for public access to
the shoreline.
2. Natural Environment. Only low-intensity, water-oriented recreational development
such as public access trails is permitted.
3. Aquatic Environment. Recreational development is permitted.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.080 Residential.
A. Implementation Policies. Existing residential development shall be allowed, subject to
BMC § 18.09.040, Nonconforming uses and structures.
Floating homes, houseboats and live-aboard vessels are not permitted.
B. Regulations by Environment.
1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Residences, floating homes, houseboats and live-
aboard vessels are prohibited.
2. Natural Environment. Residences, floating homes, houseboats and live-aboard
vessels are prohibited.
3. Aquatic Environment. Residences, floating homes, houseboats and live-aboard
vessels are prohibited.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.090 Transportation and parking – Existing corridors.
A. Implementation Policies. Existing transportation corridors shall be upgraded as feasible, to
comply with the latest edition of the Department of Ecology's Surface Water Manual, for
both quantity and quality, and shall further be required to improve public nonmotorized
access opportunities when improvements are constructed.
Transportation and parking plans and projects should support circulation system planning
for pedestrians, bicycles, and public transportation that in turn supports existing and
proposed shoreline uses.
§ 18.16.090 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.16.100
B. Regulations.
1. Existing transportation corridors shall be upgraded as feasible to comply with the
latest edition of the Department of Ecology's Surface Water Manual, for both quantity
and quality, and shall further be required to improve public nonmotorized access
opportunities when improvements are constructed.
C. Regulations by Environment.
1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Existing transportation corridors and related
improvements are permitted.
2. Natural Environment. Existing transportation corridors and related improvements are
permitted.
3. Aquatic Environment. Existing transportation corridors and related improvements are
permitted.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.100 Transportation and parking – New corridors.
A. Implementation Policies. New transportation corridors shall only be established when a
clear regional need is demonstrated.
Proposed transportation and parking plans and projects need to be planned, located and
designed where they will have the least possible adverse effect on unique or fragile
shoreline features, and will not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
They shall comply with the latest edition of the Department of Ecology's Surface Water
Manual, for both quantity and quality, and shall further be required to provide public
nonmotorized access opportunities when improvements are constructed.
Parking is the temporary storage of automobiles or other motorized vehicles. Except as
noted the following provisions apply only to parking that is "accessory" to a permitted
shoreline use. Parking as a "primary" use and parking which serves a use not permitted
in the shoreline jurisdiction is prohibited. Parking should be planned to achieve optimum
use. Where possible, parking should serve more than one use (e.g., serving recreational use
on weekends, commercial uses on weekdays). Where feasible, parking for shoreline uses
should be provided in areas outside shoreline jurisdiction. Low-impact parking facilities,
such as permeable pavements, are encouraged.
Parking as a primary use or that serves a use not permitted in the applicable shoreline
environment designation shall be prohibited over water and within shoreline jurisdiction.
Parking in shoreline jurisdiction must directly serve a permitted shoreline use.
Parking facilities shall be designed and landscaped to minimize adverse impacts upon the
adjacent shoreline and abutting properties. Landscaping shall consist of native vegetation
and/or plant materials approved by the city and planted before completion of the parking
area in such a manner that plantings provide effective screening within three years of
project completion.
Parking facilities serving individual buildings on the shoreline shall be located landward
from the principal building being served, except when the parking facility is within or
beneath the structure and adequately screened, or in cases when an alternate location would
have less environmental impact on the shoreline.
Parking facilities for shoreline activities shall provide safe and convenient pedestrian
circulation within the parking area and to the shorelines.
Parking facilities shall provide adequate facilities to prevent surface water runoff from
contaminating water bodies, using best available technologies, and include a maintenance
program that will assure proper functioning of such facilities over time.
B. Regulations, General.
1. New transportation corridors and related improvements are permitted when there is
no feasible route or location outside shoreline jurisdiction, when a clear regional need
is demonstrated and as a shoreline conditional use permit.
2. Proposed transportation and parking plans and projects shall be planned, located and
designed where they will have the least possible adverse effect on unique or fragile
shoreline features, and will not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
3. Transportation and parking shall comply with the latest edition of the Department of
Ecology's Surface Water Manual, for both quantity and quality, and shall further be
required to provide public nonmotorized access opportunities when improvements are
constructed.
4. Transportation and parking shall comply with the latest edition of the Department of
Ecology's Surface Water Manual, for both quantity and quality, and shall further be
required to provide public nonmotorized access opportunities when improvements are
constructed.
5. Parking as a primary use or that serves a use not permitted in the applicable shoreline
environment designation shall be prohibited within shoreline jurisdiction.
6. Parking facilities shall be designed and landscaped to minimize adverse impacts upon
the adjacent shoreline and abutting properties. Landscaping shall consist of native
vegetation and/or plant materials approved by the city and be planted before
completion of the parking area in such a manner that plantings provide effective
screening within three years of project completion.
7. Parking facilities serving individual buildings on the shoreline shall be located
landward from the principal building being served, except when the parking facility
is within or beneath the structure and adequately screened, or in cases when an
alternate location would have less environmental impact on the shoreline.
8. Parking facilities for shoreline activities shall provide safe and convenient pedestrian
circulation within the parking area and to the shorelines.
9. Parking facilities shall provide adequate facilities to prevent surface water runoff
from contaminating water bodies, using best available technologies and include a
maintenance program that will assure proper functioning of such facilities over time.
C. Regulations by Environment.
1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Parking areas shall be designed to minimize the
§ 18.16.100 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.16.120
environmental and visual impacts.
2. Natural Environment. Parking areas are prohibited in the natural environment.
3. Aquatic Environment. Parking areas are prohibited in the aquatic environment.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.110 Utilities including wastewater treatment plant and accessory utilities.
A. Implementation Policies. These facilities include utility production and processing as well
as large transmission facilities. It does not include accessory utilities found in BMC
§ 18.14.020(H). Design and location of utilities shall minimize harm to the shoreline,
preserve the natural landscape, and minimize conflicts with present and planned land and
shoreline uses.
B. Regulations.
1. The existing wastewater treatment plant and future expansion is a permitted facility;
new utility production and processing facilities are prohibited unless it can be
demonstrated that no other practical option is available.
2. Transmission facilities for the conveyance of services, such as pipelines and power
wires, shall be located to assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, cause
minimum harm to the shoreline and be located outside the shoreline area where
feasible, and shall be consistent with the master program environment designation.
Locate utilities in existing rights-of-way and corridors wherever possible.
C. Regulations by Environment.
1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Utilities are permitted. Transmission facilities for
the conveyance of services, such as pipelines and power wires, shall be located to
assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, cause minimum harm to the
shoreline and be located outside the shoreline area where feasible.
2. Natural Environment. Utilities are permitted. Transmission facilities for the
conveyance of services, such as pipelines and power wires, shall be located to assure
no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, cause minimum harm to the shoreline
and be located outside the shoreline area where feasible.
3. Aquatic Environment. Utilities are permitted. Transmission facilities for the
conveyance of services, such as pipelines and power wires, shall be located to assure
no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, cause minimum harm to the shoreline
and be located outside the shoreline area where feasible.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.16.120 Wetlands and Skagit River shoreline buffer areas – Restoration and.
maintenance.
A. Implementation Policies. The plans and implementation of restoration and maintenance of
wetlands and shoreline buffers shall be designed, installed, monitored and maintained in
accordance with best available science practices.
B. Regulations by Environment.
1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Wetland and Skagit River shoreline buffer
restoration and maintenance is permitted and shall be designed, installed, monitored
and maintained in accordance with best available science practices.
2. Natural Environment. Wetland and Skagit River shoreline buffer restoration and
maintenance is permitted and shall be designed, installed, monitored and maintained
in accordance with best available science practices.
3. Aquatic Environment. Wetland and Skagit River shoreline buffer restoration and
maintenance is permitted and shall be designed, installed, monitored and maintained
in accordance with best available science practices.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)