18.12.010 Adoption.
The following policy goals are adopted to provide an overall, comprehensive foundation and
sense of direction upon which the regulations, shoreline area designations, and administrative
procedures are based.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.12.020 Master program policy goals.
A. Economic Development Element.
1. Land and shoreline use patterns shall provide for the location of existing and future
transportation facilities, utilities, and recreation activities that are dependent on access
to the water.
2. Because of the unique floodway and floodplain limitations on the use of the Skagit
River shorelines, particularly the levee system, the majority of the shoreline shall be
identified and reserved for recreational and open space uses.
3. Existing and projected water-oriented uses shall be accommodated through
environment designation policies and regulations based on the inventory of existing
shoreline resources and analysis of future demand for water-oriented uses.
4. Because navigation is restricted to small boats, primarily for sports fishing, preference
shall be given to those uses that allow a significant number of people to enjoy the
shoreline, public access (water-enjoyment) and/or uses that demonstrably pursue
shoreline objectives.
5. Preference shall also be given to uses that enhance the ecological viability and
enhancement of fisheries habitats along the Skagit River shoreline.
B. Public Access Element.
1. The public access system shall provide for both physical and visual access. The
system shall include but not be limited to public lands and shall seek to increase the
amount and diversity of public access to the state's shorelines and adjacent areas
consistent with the natural shoreline character, property rights, including the public's
rights under the public trust doctrine, and public safety.
2. The public's right to use the surface waters of the state for navigation under the public
trust doctrine shall be protected.
3. The public's right to view the waters of the state shall be protected, including
measures such as maximum height limits, setbacks, and view corridors to minimize
the impacts to existing views from public property or substantial numbers of
residences.
4. The primary public access area to the Skagit River shall consist of the land that is
subject to the interlocal agreement with Dike District No. 12, with motorized public
access at Gardner Road Bar and just west of the Railroad Bridge and with
nonmotorized public access along the levee adjacent to the Skagit River.
5. Public access to Gages Slough shall include, where appropriate, viewing areas or
interpretative trails and publicly owned park lands. Decisions on where to locate
public access and the extent of access that is allowed will be based on best scientific
information developed specifically for Gages Slough.
C. Recreation Element.
1. Ensure optimal recreational opportunities now and in the future in shoreline areas that
can reasonably tolerate, during peak use periods, active, passive, competitive, or
contemplative uses without destroying the integrity and character of the shoreline.
2. The Skagit River public recreation area specifically includes the shorelines extending
from Gardner Road Bar to the Burlington-Mount Vernon Bridge for fishing, boating,
passive and active recreation activities. As the setback levee is constructed through
the bridge corridor, opportunities for public access will increase.
3. The Gages Slough recreation opportunities shall be limited based on the best available
scientific information developed specifically for Gages Slough.
4. Recreation policies in the parks and recreation comprehensive plan are adopted here
by reference and those policies are consistent with growth projections and level-of-
service standards.
D. Circulation Element.
1. Existing and planned circulation systems are adequate to serve as access to shorelines.
2. Nonmotorized routes that connect the community with the shorelines and include
environmental restoration and interpretative components shall be made whenever
feasible.
E. Use Element.
1. It is the goal to protect and restore the Gages Slough wetlands to optimize water
quality, habitat, best management practices and ensure that adjacent land use patterns
are compatible with the protection and enhancement of the wetlands and take
advantage of the unique attributes of the site, allowing no net loss of wetlands, and
for Gages Slough, to also increase the size of culverts, remove obstructions, develop
and implement specific plans to improve the functions relative to surface water
management, and generally improve the flow characteristics to provide for efficient
conveyance of water through the city during flood events.
2. It is the goal to allow limited use of the Skagit River and its shoreline compatible with
the current edition of the Burlington floodplain management and natural hazard
mitigation plan, consistent with the following priorities: recognizing and protecting
the state-wide interest over local interests, preserving natural character, realizing
long-term over short-term benefit, protecting resources and ecology, increasing public
access to publicly owned areas, increasing recreational opportunities, providing for
any other element that is appropriate or necessary.
F. Conservation and Restoration Element.
§ 18.12.020 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.12.020
1. The Skagit River riparian corridor shall be managed in accordance with regional
watershed planning standards and best management practices, including vegetation
management of shoreline areas fronted by levees. Adaptive management techniques
shall be employed as additional scientific information and regional mitigation plans
are developed.
2. The floodplain shall be managed in accordance with applicable federal, state, regional
and local regulations, best management practices and best available science practices,
along with the city of Burlington floodplain management and natural hazard
mitigation plan.
3. Reclaim and restore areas which are biologically and aesthetically degraded to the
greatest extent feasible while maintaining appropriate use of the shoreline. Preserve
and protect the natural resources of the shorelines in the public interest and for future
generations.
4. Protect ground water aquifers from contamination.
5. Protect native vegetation and wildlife within the protected wetlands and riparian
corridors and their buffers, and encourage planned buffer restoration and parks open
space enhancement; provided, that, in the case of the shoreline fronted by levees along
the Skagit River, vegetation management standards are established by the Corps of
Engineers, as may be amended.
6. Encourage the cleanup and ecological restoration of degraded shorelines, including
the Gages Slough corridor.
G. Historic and Cultural Element.
1. Identify, protect, preserve and restore important archaeological, historical and cultural
sites located in shorelines for educational and scientific purposes, and enjoyment of
the public.
2. Optimize educational opportunities by encouraging interpretative displays and
facilities for educational purposes, as part of public access.
H. Flood Damage Reduction Element.
1. Continue to work closely with the Dike Districts, Skagit County, and business and
property owners in flood risk reduction planning.
2. Implement the flood risk reduction planning objectives and projects in the city of
Burlington as further defined in the Burlington floodplain management and natural
hazard mitigation plan.
3. Participate in watershed-wide programs to reduce flood hazards and improve
shoreline ecology.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)
§ 18.14.010 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.14.020