18.14.010 Introduction.
General policies and regulations are applicable to all uses and activities (regardless of master
program environment designation) that may occur along a jurisdiction's shorelines. If used
properly, they can also reduce redundancy in a master program by eliminating the need to repeat
regulations over and over for each environment designation.
BMC § 18.14.020 is broken up into 10 different topic headings and is arranged alphabetically.
Each topic begins with a discussion of background master program issues and considerations,
followed by general policy statements and regulations. The intent of these model provisions is
to be inclusive, making them applicable over a wide range of environments as well as particular
uses and activities.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013)

18.14.020 Policies and regulations.
A. Universally Applicable Policies and Regulations.
1. Applicability. The following regulations describe the requirements for all shoreline
uses and development in all environment designations.
2. Policies.
a. The city will periodically review conditions on the shoreline and conduct
appropriate analysis to determine whether or not other actions are necessary to
protect and restore the ecology, protect human health and safety, upgrade the
visual qualities, protect property rights and enhance residential and recreational
uses on the city's shorelines. Specific issues to address in such evaluations
include, but are not limited to:
i. Water quality.
ii. Conservation of aquatic vegetation (control of noxious weeds and
enhancement of vegetation that supports more desirable ecological and
recreational conditions).
iii. Upland vegetation.
iv. Shoreline stabilization and modifications.
b. The city will keep records of all project review actions within shoreline
jurisdiction, including shoreline permits, letters of exemption, and building
permits.
c. Where appropriate, the city will pursue the policies of this master program in
other land use, development permitting, public construction, and public health
and safety activities that may not fall under the authority of the Shoreline
Management Act. Specifically, such activities include, but are not limited to:
i. Water quality and storm water management activities, including those
§ 18.14.020 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.14.020
outside shoreline jurisdiction but affecting the shorelines of the state.
ii. Aquatic vegetation management.
iii. Health and safety activities, especially those related to sanitary sewage.
iv. Public works and utilities development.
v. Involve affected federal, state, and tribal governments in the review
process of shoreline applications.
3. Regulations.
a. All proposed shoreline uses and development, including those that do not
require a shoreline permit, must conform to the Shoreline Management Act,
chapter 90.58 RCW, and to the policies and regulations of this master program.
b. All new shoreline development must be in support of an allowable shoreline use
that conforms to the provisions of this master program. Except as otherwise
noted, all shoreline developments not associated with a legally existing or an
approved shoreline use are prohibited.
c. Shoreline uses, development, and conditions listed as "prohibited" shall not be
eligible for consideration as a shoreline variance or shoreline conditional use
permit.
d. The "policies" listed in this master program will provide broad guidance and
direction and will be used by the city in applying the "regulations." The policies,
taken together, constitute the shoreline element of the Burlington
comprehensive plan.
e. Where provisions of this master program conflict, the provisions most directly
implementing the objectives of the Shoreline Management Act, as determined
by the city, shall apply unless specifically stated otherwise.
f. All new shoreline use and development shall result in no net loss of shoreline
ecological functions necessary to sustain shoreline natural resources by utilizing
the mitigation sequencing as outlined in subsection (C)(3) of this section.
B. Archaeological, Historical, and Cultural Resources.
1. Applicability. The archaeological, historical, and cultural resources element provides
for protection and restoration of buildings, structures, sites, districts, objects, and
areas, hereinafter referred to as "sites," having known or potential archaeological,
historical, cultural, or scientific value or significance.
The following provisions apply to archaeological and historic resources that are either
recorded at the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP) and/or
by local jurisdictions or have been inadvertently uncovered.
2. Policies.
a. Due to the limited and irreplaceable nature of the resource, public or private
uses, activities, and development should be prevented from destroying or
damaging any site having historic, cultural, scientific or educational value as
identified by the appropriate authorities and deemed worthy of protection and
preservation.
b. Site development activity in shoreline areas shall be subject to the policies and
regulations of this section and the Burlington comprehensive plan policies
related to such resources. The archaeological, historical, and cultural resources
element provides for protection and restoration of buildings, structures, sites,
districts, objects, and areas, hereinafter referred to as "sites," having known or
potential archaeological, historical, cultural, or scientific value or significance.
c. Shoreline features should be protected to prevent the destruction of or damage
to any site having archaeological, historic, cultural, or scientific value through
coordination and consultation with the appropriate local, state, tribal, and federal
authorities.
d. Sites should be protected in collaboration with appropriate tribal, state, federal,
and local governments. Cooperation among public and private parties is to be
encouraged in the identification, protection, and management of cultural
resources.
e. When or where appropriate, access to such sites should be made available to
parties of interest. Access to such sites must be designed and managed in a
manner that gives maximum protection to the resource.
f. Opportunities for education related to archaeological, historical, and cultural
features should be provided when or where appropriate and incorporated into
public and private management efforts, programs, and development.
3. Regulations – General.
a. All applications for a shoreline development permit, a building permit, a
clearing and grading permit, a demolition permit, or a statement of exemption
for shoreline development within the jurisdiction of the Burlington SMP shall
be reviewed for a determination of whether the site(s) in question:
i. Is on property within 500 feet of a site known to contain historic, cultural,
or archaeological resource(s); or
ii. Is in an area mapped as having the potential for the presence of
archaeological, historic, or cultural resources to be present.
b. All applications meeting these criteria shall require a cultural resource site
survey or assessment, unless this requirement is waived or modified by the
DAHP. Any required site assessment shall be conducted by a professional
archaeologist or historic preservation professional, as applicable, to determine
the presence of historic or significant archaeological resources. Buildings or
structures over 40 years in age shall be inventoried in a DAHP historic property
inventory database entry and archaeological sites shall be recorded on DAHP
archaeological site inventory forms. The fee for the services of the professional
archaeologist or historic preservationist shall be paid by the applicant.
c. If the cultural resource site assessment identifies the presence of archaeological,
§ 18.14.020 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.14.020
significant historic or cultural resources, appropriate recommendations shall be
prepared by a professional archaeologist or historic preservation professional,
as part of the survey or assessment. The fee for the services of the professional
archaeologist or historic preservation professional shall be paid by the applicant.
In the preparation of such plans, the professional archaeologist or historic
preservation professional shall solicit comments from the Washington State
Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, and the affected tribe(s).
Comments received from these reviewers shall be incorporated into the
conclusions and recommended conditions of the survey or assessment to the
maximum extent practicable.
d. A cultural resources survey or site assessment shall be prepared in accordance
with guidance for such studies approved or promulgated by the DAHP. DAHP
shall determine whether the research design or study is adequate.
e. The administrator shall consult with the Washington State Department of
Archaeology and Historic Preservation and affected tribe(s) prior to approval
and acceptance of the survey or assessment.
f. Based upon consultation with DAHP and affected tribe(s), the administrator
may reject or request revision of the conclusions reached in a survey or
assessment when the administrator can demonstrate that the assessment is
inaccurate or does not fully address the historic or archaeological resource
management concerns involved.
g. In the event a cultural resources survey or site assessment is submitted directly
to the city of Burlington, the professional archaeologist or historic preservation
professional will be advised to submit the materials directly to DAHP.
h. In granting shoreline permits or statements of exemption for such development,
the city of Burlington may attach conditions of approval to require consultation
with the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic
Preservation, affected tribe(s), and any local historic preservation authority, to
assure that historic or archaeological resources are properly protected, or for
appropriate agencies to contact property owners regarding purchase or other
long-term arrangements. Provisions for the protection and preservation of
historic or archaeological sites, structures, buildings, districts, objects, or areas
shall be incorporated to the maximum extent practicable.
4. Regulations – Inadvertent Discovery.
a. Whenever historic, cultural, or archaeological sites or artifacts are discovered in
the process of development on shorelines, work on that portion of the
development site shall be stopped immediately and the find reported as soon as
possible to the administrator or DAHP.
b. The administrator shall then notify the Washington State Department of
Archaeology and Historic Preservation, affected tribe(s), any local historic
preservation authority, and any other appropriate agencies and, upon
consultation with DAHP, shall require that an immediate site assessment be
conducted by a professional archaeologist or historic preservation professional,
as applicable, pursuant to subsection (B)(3)(b) of this section to determine the
extent of damage to the resource. The site assessment shall be distributed to
the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, the
affected tribe(s), and local historic preservation authority for a 15-day review
period. If the above listed agencies or governments have failed to respond
within the applicable review period following receipt of the site assessment,
such stopped work may resume.
c. If human remains are encountered, all activity must cease and the area must be
protected and the find reported to local law enforcement and the county coroner
or medical examiner.
C. Critical Areas.
1. Applicability.
a. Wetlands and their buffers occurring in the city's shoreline jurisdiction (note:
the city is not opting for the expansion of the shoreline jurisdiction, as provided
for in RCW 90.58.030(2)(d)(ii)).
b. The main stem of the Skagit River, which is designated an aquatic environment
in BMC § 18.07.040(C), and its buffer, which provide the critical ecological
function of fish passage to upstream spawning and rearing habitats.
c. The language adopted as part of this SMP has been reviewed and determined to
meet the standard of no net loss of ecological functions.
d. This shoreline master program regulates critical areas within the city's shoreline
jurisdiction. See Appendix A4.
2. Policies.
a. In implementing this master program, the city will take necessary steps to ensure
compliance with chapter 43.21 RCW, the Washington State Environmental
Policy Act of 1971, and its implementing guidelines.
b. All significant adverse impacts to the shoreline should be avoided or, if that is
not possible, minimized to the extent feasible.
3. Regulations.
a. All project proposals, including those for which a shoreline permit is not
required, shall comply with chapter 43.21C RCW, the Washington State
Environmental Policy Act.
b. Applicable sections of the city's critical areas ordinance, chapter 14.15 BMC
(Ordinance 1853, passed in 2018) pertaining to critical areas have been
embedded into the SMP as Appendix A5, Wetlands, Fish and Wildlife Habitat
Conservation Areas, and General Critical Area Regulations.
c. Projects that cause significant ecological impacts are not allowed unless
mitigated according to the sequence in subsection (C)(3)(d) of this section to
4. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to the title.
5. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to the title.
§ 18.14.020 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.14.020
avoid reduction or damage to ecosystem-wide processes and ecological
functions.
d. Projects that cause significant adverse impacts, other than significant ecological
impacts, shall be mitigated according to the sequence in subsection (C)(3)(d) of
this section.
e. When applying mitigation to avoid or minimize significant adverse effects and
significant ecological impacts, the city will apply the following sequence of
steps in order of priority, with (i) being top priority:
i. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an
action;
ii. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and
its implementation by using appropriate technology or by taking
affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;
iii. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected
environment;
iv. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and
maintenance operations;
v. Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing
substitute resources or environments; and
vi. Monitoring the impact and the compensation projects and taking
appropriate corrective measures.
f. The city will set mitigation requirements or permit conditions based on impacts
identified. In determining appropriate mitigation measures, avoidance of
impacts by means such as relocating or redesigning the proposed development
will be applied first. Lower priority measures will be applied only after higher
priority measures are demonstrated to be not feasible or not applicable.
g. All shoreline development shall be located and constructed to avoid significant
adverse impacts to human health and safety.
h. All such activities shall be carried out in ways that cause the least impact to
critical areas and their buffers. If any damage is caused to a critical area or buffer
in connection with such activity, the critical area and its buffer must be restored
to the extent feasible. To be exempt does not give permission to destroy a critical
area or ignore risk. Proponents of such activities shall be responsible for
notifying the director if any damage occurs and shall provide all necessary
restoration or mitigation. For information on identifying, protecting or
mitigating adverse impacts to critical areas, refer to Appendix A6.
i. The critical areas buffer, otherwise referred to as a "riparian buffer," for the
Skagit River, which is designated as a Type-S stream in Section 14.15.380(B)
of Appendix A7, shall be landward of the waterward toe of the levee or 200 feet
6. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to the title.
from the ordinary high water mark of the river where no levee exists.
D. Flood Hazard Reduction.
1. Applicability. The provisions in this section apply to those areas within the shoreline
management zone lying along the Skagit River floodplain corridor, including the
river, and associated wetlands in the floodplain.
The provisions in this section are intended to address two concerns especially relevant
to river shorelines:
a. Protecting human safety and minimizing flood hazard to human activities and
development.
b. Protecting and contributing to the restoration of ecosystem-wide processes and
ecological functions found in the applicable watershed or sub-basin.
2. Policies.
a. Implement a comprehensive program to manage the city's floodplain corridor
that integrates the following city ordinances and activities:
i. Regulations of the master program as codified in the BMC.
ii. The floodplain management standards in BMC § 14.15.390 through
14.15.432.
iii. The development standards of the underlying zoning district.
iv. The city storm water management plan and implementing regulations.
v. The city's participation in flood hazard reduction programs, including the
Federal Emergency Management Act and the Washington State Flood
Control Assistance Account Program, and the 2008-2013 Floodplain
Management and Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan.
vi. City, county and dike district approved flood risk reduction measures.
vii. The construction or improvement of new public facilities, including roads,
levees, utilities, bridges, and other structures.
viii. The ecological restoration of selected shoreline areas.
b. In regulating development on shorelines within SMA jurisdiction, endeavor to
achieve the following:
i. Maintenance of human safety.
ii. Protection and, where appropriate, the restoration of the physical integrity
of the ecological system processes, including wetland buffer restoration
and storm water quality restoration.
iii. Protection of water quality and natural ground water movement.
7. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to the title.
§ 18.14.020 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.14.020
iv. Protection of fish, vegetation, and other life forms and their habitat vital to
the aquatic food chain.
v. Protection of recreation resources and aesthetic values.
c. Undertake flood hazard mitigation planning in a coordinated manner among
affected property owners and public agencies and consider the entire Skagit
River drainage system.
d. Manage the existing levee system along the Skagit River shoreline to optimize
flood protection and manage levee vegetation as required under the Corps of
Engineers PL 84-99 standards as may be amended.
e. Provide public pedestrian access to the shoreline for low-impact outdoor
recreation.
3. Regulations.
a. New, structural, public flood hazard reduction projects that are continuous in
nature, such as levees, shall provide public access to the shoreline unless such
access is not feasible or desirable according to the criteria in the public access
section of the SMP.
b. Designs for flood hazard reduction measures and shoreline stabilization
measures in the river corridor must be prepared by qualified professional
engineers, geologists, and/or hydrologists who have expertise in local riverine
processes.
c. Existing hydrological connections to the floodplain and associated wetlands
shall be maintained where feasible.
d. Use and development that do not meet the following standards are prohibited in
the floodway:
i. Minor structures and additions for which a building permit is not required;
ii. Fills of less than 12 cubic yards or which will not raise the level of the land
above that of the surrounding area;
iii. Normal maintenance, resurfacing and rebuilding, at comparable grade of
streets, and accessways;
iv. Underground improvements and excavations;
v. Maintenance and minor repair of existing improvements;
vi. Improvements to structures listed on the National or State Register of
Historic Places;
vii. Other minor developments which cause no significant impoundment or
displacement of floodwaters, such as open fences, signs and small
unenclosed structures;
viii. Utility outfall structures authorized by the Corps of Engineers and levee
construction to maintain the structural integrity of critical infrastructure.
e. New structural flood hazard reduction measures in shoreline jurisdiction are
allowed only when it can be demonstrated by a scientific and engineering
analysis that they are necessary to protect existing development, that
nonstructural measures are not feasible, that impacts on ecological functions and
priority species and habitats can be successfully mitigated so as to assure no net
loss, and that appropriate vegetation conservation actions are undertaken
consistent with WAC 173-26-221(5) or as required under the Corps of
Engineers PL 84-99 standards as may be amended.
f. Structural flood hazard reduction measures shall be consistent with an adopted
comprehensive flood hazard management plan approved by the department that
evaluates cumulative impacts to the watershed system.
E. Public Access.
1. Applicability. Shoreline public access is the physical ability of the general public to
reach and touch the water's edge and/or the ability to have a view of the water and the
shoreline from upland locations. Public access facilities may include picnic areas,
pathways and trails, floats and docks, promenades, viewing towers, bridges, boat
launches, and improved street ends. The city has adopted a plan for nonmotorized
public access that extends along the Skagit River frontage on the levees, and connects
to a trail system along Gages Slough and through the city to the east to Cascade Trail
and to the west.
2. Policies.
a. Public access should be considered in the review of all private and public
developments as appropriate.
b. Developments, uses, and activities on or near the shoreline should not impair or
detract from the public's access to the water, or the rights of navigation, or space
for water-dependent uses.
c. Promote and enhance the public interest with regard to rights to access waters
held in public trust by the state while protecting private property rights and
public safety.
3. Regulations.
a. Except as provided in subsections (E)(3)(b) and (c) of this section, shoreline
substantial developments or conditional uses shall provide public access where
any of the following conditions are present:
i. Where a development or use will create increased demand for public
access to the shoreline, the development or use shall provide public access
to mitigate this impact.
ii. Where a development or use will interfere with an existing public access
way, the development or use shall provide public access to mitigate this
impact. Impacts to public access may include blocking access or
discouraging use of existing on-site or nearby accesses.
iii. Where a use which is not a priority shoreline use under the Shoreline
§ 18.14.020 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.14.020
Management Act locates on a shoreline of the state, the use or
development shall provide public access to mitigate this impact.
iv. Where a use or development will interfere with a public use of lands or
waters subject to the public trust doctrine, the development shall provide
public access to mitigate this impact.
v. Where the development is proposed by a public entity or on public lands.
vi. Where called for under the city's connected open space and nonmotorized
public access plan, including completing public access along the levees on
the Skagit River and the Gages Slough trail.
b. The shoreline permit file shall describe the impact, the required public access
conditions, and how the conditions address the impact. Mitigation for public
access impacts shall be in accordance with the definition of mitigation and
mitigation sequence.
c. An applicant need not provide public access where the city determines that one
or more of the following conditions apply:
i. The adopted city's public access planning indicates that public access is
not required;
ii. Unavoidable health or safety hazards to the public exist which cannot be
prevented by any practical means;
iii. Significant ecological impacts will result from the public access which
cannot be mitigated; or
iv. Significant undue and unavoidable conflict between any access provisions
and the proposed use and/or adjacent uses would occur and cannot be
mitigated.
d. In order to meet any of the conditions in subsections (E)(3)(c)(i) through (iv) of
this section, the applicant must first demonstrate and the city determine in its
findings that all reasonable alternatives have been exhausted, including but not
limited to:
i. Regulating access by such means as maintaining a gate and/or limiting
hours of use;
ii. Designing separation of uses and activities (e.g., fences, terracing, use of
one-way glazings, hedges, landscaping, etc.); and
iii. Developing provisions for access at a site geographically separated from
the proposal such as a street end, vista or trail system.
e. Public access provided by shoreline street ends, public utilities and rights-of-
way shall not be diminished. (This is a requirement of RCW 35.79.035 and
36.87.130.)
f. Public access sites shall be connected directly to the nearest public street or
public right-of-way and shall include provisions for physically impaired
persons, where feasible.
g. Required public access sites shall be fully developed and available for public
use at the time of occupancy of the use or activity unless not feasible.
h. Public access easements and permit conditions shall be recorded on the deed of
title and/or on the face of a plat or short plat as a condition running
contemporaneous with the authorized land use, at a minimum. Said recording
with the county auditor's office shall occur at the time of permit approval (RCW
58.17.110).
i. Minimum width of public access easements shall be 20 feet, unless the city
determines that undue hardship would result. In such cases, easement width may
be reduced only to the minimum extent necessary to relieve the hardship.
j. The standard state approved logo or other approved signs that indicate the
public's right of access and hours of access shall be constructed, installed and
maintained by the applicant in conspicuous locations at public access sites. In
accordance with subsection (E)(3)(a) of this section, signs may control or
restrict public access as a condition of permit approval.
k. Future actions by the applicant successors in interest or other parties shall not
diminish the usefulness or value of the public access provided.
l. Public access shall be provided as close as feasible to the water's edge without
causing significant ecological impacts and should be designed in accordance
with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
m. Public access shall be designed to provide for public safety and comfort and to
minimize potential impacts to private property and individual privacy. There
shall be a physical separation or other means of clearly delineating public and
private space in order to avoid unnecessary user conflict.
n. Public views from the shoreline upland areas shall be enhanced and preserved.
Enhancement of views should not be construed to mean excessive removal of
existing native vegetation that partially impairs views.
o. Public access and interpretive displays should be provided as part of publicly
funded restoration projects where significant ecological impacts can be avoided.
p. The adopted connected open space plan and nonmotorized plan in the city's
parks and recreation plan shall be implemented to provide a continuous
waterfront multi-purpose trail and Gages Slough trail that connects to the
Blooming Tree Trail on SR 20 and will connect the community east/west/north/
south.
F. Shorelines of Statewide Significance.
1. Applicability. The Shoreline Management Act specifically designates certain areas as
shorelines of statewide significance. The interest of all of the people shall be
paramount in the management of shorelines of statewide significance. Preference
shall be given to uses and developments which are consistent with the principle of
statewide over local interest.
§ 18.14.020 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.14.020
Natural rivers or segments thereof lying west of the crest of the Cascade range
downstream of a point where the mean annual flow is measured at 1,000 cubic feet
per second or more and associated shorelands. The flow of the Skagit River is over
100,000 cubic feet per second and constitutes the shoreline of statewide significance
for the city of Burlington.
2. Policies. The City, in adopting guidelines for shorelines of statewide significance,
shall give preference to uses in the following order of preference which:
a. Recognize and protect the state-wide interest over local interest;
b. Preserve the natural character of the shoreline;
c. Result in long-term over short-term benefit;
d. Protect the resources and ecology of the shoreline;
e. Increase public access to publicly owned areas of the shorelines;
f. Increase recreational opportunities for the public in the shoreline;
g. Provide for any other element deemed appropriate or necessary within the
context of the policies and use regulations of this program.
G. Signage.
1. Applicability. A sign is defined as a device of any material or medium, including
structural component parts, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to
the subject matter for advertising, identification or informative purposes. The
following provisions apply to any commercial or advertising sign directing attention
to a business, professional service, community, site, facility, or entertainment,
conducted or sold either on or off premises.
2. Policies.
a. Signs should be designed and placed so that they are compatible with the
aesthetic quality of the existing shoreline and adjacent land and water uses.
b. Signs should not block or otherwise interfere with visual access to the water or
shorelines.
3. Regulations.
a. All signs shall be located and designed to avoid interference with vistas,
viewpoints and visual access to the shoreline.
b. Over-water signs, signs on floats or pilings, and signs for goods, services, or
businesses not located directly on the site proposed for a sign are prohibited.
c. Lighted signs shall be hooded, shaded, or aimed so that direct light will not
result in glare when viewed from surrounding properties or watercourses.
d. Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area. On-site freestanding signs
shall not exceed six feet in height. When feasible, signs shall be flush-mounted
against existing buildings.
e. Temporary or obsolete signs shall be removed within 10 days of elections,
closures of business, or termination of any other function. Examples of
temporary signs include: real estate signs, directions to events, political
advertisements, event or holiday signs, construction signs, and signs advertising
a sale or promotional event.
f. Signs that do not meet the policies and regulations of this program shall be
removed or conform within two years of the adoption of this master program.
g. No signs shall be placed in a required view corridor.
h. Allowable Signs. The following types of signs may be allowed in all shoreline
environments:
i. Water navigational signs, and highway and railroad signs necessary for
operation, safety and direction.
ii. Public information signs directly relating to a shoreline use or activity.
iii. Off-premises, freestanding signs for community identification,
information, or directional purposes.
iv. National, site and institutional flags or temporary decorations customary
for special holidays and similar events of a public nature.
v. Temporary directional signs to public or quasi-public events if removed
within 10 days following the event.
i. Prohibited Signs. The following types of signs are prohibited:
i. Off-premises detached outdoor advertising signs.
ii. Commercial signs for products, services, or facilities located off site.
iii. Spinners, streamers, pennants, flashing lights and other animated signs
used for commercial purposes. Highway and railroad signs are exceptions.
iv. Signs placed on trees or other natural features.
H. Utilities (Accessory).
1. Applicability. Accessory utilities are those that affect small-scale distribution services
connected directly to the uses along the shoreline. They are addressed in this section
because they concern all types of development and have the potential to impact the
quality of the shoreline and its waters.
2. Policies.
a. Accessory utilities should be properly installed so as to protect the shoreline and
water from contamination and degradation.
b. Accessory utility facilities and rights-of-way should be located outside of the
shoreline area to the maximum extent possible. When utility lines require a
shoreline location, they should be placed underground.
§ 18.14.020 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.14.020
c. Accessory utility facilities should be designed and located in a manner which
preserves the natural landscape and shoreline ecological processes and functions
and minimizes conflicts with present and planned land uses.
3. Regulations.
a. In shoreline areas, accessory utility transmission lines, pipelines and cables shall
be placed underground unless demonstrated to be infeasible. Further, such lines
shall utilize existing rights-of-way, corridors and/or bridge crossings whenever
possible. Proposals for new corridors in shoreline areas involving water
crossings must fully substantiate the infeasibility of existing routes.
b. Accessory utility development shall, through coordination with government
agencies, provide for compatible multiple uses of sites and rights-of-way. Such
uses include shoreline access points, trails and other forms of recreation and
transportation systems, providing such uses will not unduly interfere with utility
operations or endanger public health and safety.
c. Sites disturbed for utility installation shall be stabilized during and following
construction to avoid adverse impacts from erosion and, where feasible, restored
to pre-project configuration and replanted with native vegetation.
d. Utility discharges and outfalls should be located, designed, constructed, and
operated in accordance with best management practices to ensure degradation to
water quality is kept to a minimum.
I. Vegetation Conservation.
1. Applicability.
a. The following provisions apply to any activity that results in the removal of or
impact to shoreline vegetation, whether or not that activity requires a shoreline
permit, except as noted herein. Such activities include clearing, grading,
grubbing, and trimming of vegetation. These provisions also apply to vegetation
protection and enhancement activities.
b. Management of vegetation as a function of flood risk reduction structure
maintenance shall comply with standards of the PL 84-99 Rehabilitation and
Inspection Program for nonfederal levees conducted by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers or other agencies with jurisdiction over such structures.
2. Policies.
a. Vegetation within the city shoreline areas, waterward of dikes and levees or
where no such structures exist, should be enhanced over time to provide a
greater level of ecological function.
b. The master program, in conjunction with other city of Burlington development
regulations, should establish a coordinated and effective set of provisions and
programs to protect and restore functions provided by shoreline vegetation.
c. Aquatic weed management should stress prevention first. Where active removal
or destruction is necessary, it should be the minimum to allow water-dependent
activities to continue, minimize negative impacts to native plant communities,
and include appropriate handling or disposal of weeds.
3. Regulations.
a. Except for levees, all development, including clearing and grading, shall
minimize vegetation removal in areas of shoreline jurisdiction to that necessary
to accommodate the proposed development. In order to implement this
regulation, applicants proposing development that includes significant
vegetation removal, clearing, or grading within areas of shoreline jurisdiction,
as a part of a substantial development permit application or a shoreline
exemption certificate application, shall submit a site plan drawn to scale,
indicating existing and proposed land contours, dimensions and locations of all
existing and proposed structures and improvements. The site plan shall also
include a general indication of the character of vegetation found on the site, and
the extent of proposed clearing and/or grading (see WAC 173-27-180(9)). The
city may require that the proposed development or extent of clearing and
grading be modified to reduce the impacts to ecological functions. Note that this
provision does not apply to the removal of noxious and invasive plant species.
b. Vegetation restoration of disturbed shorelines waterward of levees shall use
diverse native plant material similar to that which originally occurred on site,
unless the city finds that such material is not appropriate.
c. A condition of all development shall be that those shorelines on the site not
occupied by structures, landscaping, accessory uses, or other areas dedicated to
human activities shall be revegetated with native vegetation, to the extent
feasible given the applicable shoreline conditions and the likelihood of long-
term survival of such vegetation if it is reintroduced.
d. The enhancement of vegetation shall be a condition of all development in the
shoreline environments, except where the city finds that:
i. Vegetation enhancement is not feasible on the project site or necessary.
ii. The restoration of ecological processes and functions can be better
achieved through other measures.
iii. Sufficient native vegetation already exists.
e. Aquatic weed control shall only occur when native plant communities and
associated habitats are threatened or where an existing water dependent use is
restricted by the presence of weeds. Aquatic weed control shall occur in
compliance with all other applicable laws and standards.
f. The control of aquatic weeds by hand pulling, mechanical harvesting, or
placement of aqua screens shall be considered normal maintenance and repair
and, therefore, exempt from the requirement to obtain a shoreline substantial
development permit.
g. Use of herbicides to control aquatic weeds shall be prohibited, except where no
reasonable alternative exists and weed control is demonstrated to be in the
public interest. A conditional use permit shall be required in such case.
§ 18.14.020 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.14.020
h. Selective pruning of trees for purposes of safety and protection of public views
of the river is allowed, provided such pruning is the minimum necessary.
i. Management of vegetation as a function of flood risk reduction structure
maintenance shall comply with standards of PL 84-99, Rehabilitation and
Inspection Program, for nonfederal levees conducted by the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers or other agencies with jurisdiction over such structures.
J. Water Quality.
1. Applicability. The following section applies to all development and uses in shoreline
jurisdiction that may affect water quality.
2. Policies.
a. All shoreline uses and activities should be located, designed, constructed, and
maintained to avoid significant ecological impacts by altering water quality,
quantity, or hydrology.
b. The city should require reasonable setbacks, buffers, and storm water storage
basins and encourage low-impact development techniques and materials to
achieve the objective of lessening negative impacts on water quality.
c. All measures for controlling erosion, stream flow rates, or flood waters through
the use of stream control works should be located, designed, constructed, and
maintained so that net off-site impacts related to water do not degrade the
existing water quality.
d. As a general policy, the city will seek to improve water quality, quantity, and
flow characteristics in order to protect and restore ecological functions and
ecosystem-wide processes of shorelines within shoreline management zone.
3. Regulations.
a. All shoreline development, both during and after construction, shall avoid or
minimize significant ecological impacts, including any increase in surface
runoff, through control, treatment, and release of surface water runoff so that the
receiving water quality and shore properties and features are not adversely
affected. Control measures include, but are not limited to, dikes, catch basins or
settling ponds, oil interceptor drains, grassy swales, planted buffers, and fugitive
dust controls.
b. All development shall conform to local, state, and federal water quality
regulations.
c. The city shall require reasonable setbacks, buffers, and encourage low-impact
development techniques and materials to achieve the objective of lessening
negative impacts on water quality.
d. The city has adopted the current edition of the Washington Department of
Ecology Stormwater Manual as part of the surface water management
regulations.
e. All measures for the treatment of runoff for the purpose of maintaining and/or
enhancing water quality should be conducted on site before shoreline
development impacts waters off site.
(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1924 § 1 (Exh. A), 2022)
§ 18.16.010 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM § 18.16.010