Chapter 17.87 SIGNS

         Chapter 17.87
SIGNS

             Sections:

              17.87.010    Intent.

              17.87.020    Definitions.

              17.87.025    Applicability and permit required.

              17.87.030    Residential districts (R-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and MHP) – General provisions.

              17.87.040    Residential districts – Additional provisions.

              17.87.050    Public district (P).

              17.87.060    Residential office district (R-O).

              17.87.065    Professional offices and health care development districts (P-O and H-C-D).

              17.87.070    Central business district (C-1).

              17.87.080    General commercial, community commercial, and commercial limited industrial districts (C-2, C-3 and C-L).

              17.87.090    Neighborhood business district (C-4).

              17.87.100    Light manufacturing and commercial and industrial districts (M-1 and M-2).

              17.87.110    Comprehensive sign plan.

              17.87.120    Permits – Fees.

              17.87.130    Technical requirements.

              17.87.140    Miscellaneous restrictions and requirements.

              17.87.150    Signs specifically prohibited.

              17.87.155    Liquor Control Board’s rules.

              17.87.160    Noncompliance – Removal when.

              17.87.170    Portable signs.

              17.87.180    Bench signs.

        17.87.010  Intent.

             A. Regulation of the construction, erection, maintenance, electrification, illumination, type, size, number and locations of signs is intended to:

             1. Protect the health, safety, property and welfare of the public;

             2. Maintain the neat, clean, orderly and attractive appearance of the city;

             3. Preserve and enhance the unique scenic beauty and the business, recreational, educational, tourist and retirement potential of the city.

             B. Signs are permitted only in accordance with these provisions and the regulations established for each land use district. (Ord. 2352, 1989).

        17.87.020  Definitions.

             A. “Changing message center” or “electronic message center” means an electronically or electrically controlled public service time, temperature and date sign, message center or reader board where different copy changes of a public service or commercial nature are shown on the same lamp bank.

             B. “Building frontage” means the measurement in linear feet of the portion of a building that is parallel with an existing dedicated right-of-way or roadway easement. A building may be parallel to more than one dedicated right-of-way or roadway easement; and when this is the case, the sign applicant may choose which side of a building the measurements for sign area are to be based upon. This sign allowance is calculated per one single building frontage.

             C. “Directional sign” means a sign permanently erected or permitted by the city or the state to denote the name of any thoroughfare, the route to any city, town, village, educational institution, public building, business, historic place, shrine or hospital; to direct and regulate traffic; or to denote any railroad crossing, bridge, ferry or other transportation or transmission company for the direction or safety of the public. “Directional sign” also means a sign, notice or symbol about the time and place of regular civic meetings and religious activities and services. “Directional sign” also means a sign which has only information (informational-directional sign) on exit and entrance or parking and contains no form of advertising copy or the name of any advertiser. “Directional sign” also means a sign that identifies a neighborhood, business district and/or community. Such signs may be located in the public right-of-way or on private property that is within the area identified by the signage.

             D. “Freestanding sign” means a sign attached to the ground and supported by uprights or braces placed on or in the ground (also called “ground” or “pole” sign).

             E. “Ground sign” means a type of freestanding sign which is erected on the ground, and which contains no free air space between the ground and the top of the sign.

             F. “Incidental sign” means a small sign eight square feet or less in area which pertains to goods, products, services or facilities which are available on the premises where the sign occurs, and intended primarily for the convenience of the public.

             G. “Mansard roof sign” means a sign which is structurally incorporated into a sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally capable of being treated as a building wall.

             H. “Marquee” means a permanent structure attached to and projecting from a building and providing protection from the weather elements, but does not include a projecting roof.

             I. “Marquee sign” means any sign which forms part of or is integrated into a marquee or canopy and which does not extend horizontally beyond the limits of such marquee or canopy.

             J. “Multiple building complex” means a group of structures housing at least one retail business, office, commercial venture or independent or separate part of a business which shares the same lot, access and/or parking facilities.

             K. “Multiple tenant building” means a single structure housing more than one retail business, office or commercial venture.

             L. “On-premises sign” means a sign which displays only advertising copy strictly incidental to the lawful use of the premises on which it is located and shall, depending upon the district in which it is located, contain any or all of the following:

             1. The name of the owner, occupant, management or firm occupying the premises;

             2. The address of the use;

             3. The kind or name of business and/or the brand name of the principal commodities sold or produced on the premises;

             4. Other information relative to a service or activity involved in the conduct of the business (also includes owner identification or business sign).

             M. “Off-premises sign” means any sign which cannot be classified as an on-premises sign as described above, but is not a billboard.

             N. “Pedestal sign” means a sign that is no higher than five feet above ground elevation and which is attached to the ground by means of a solid base or at least two legs.

             O. “Portable sign” means any sign of any material, including paper, cardboard, wood or metal, which is capable of being moved easily and is not permanently affixed to the ground, structure or building.

             P. Street Frontage. If the business establishment fronts upon more than one street, the sign applicant may choose which street frontage the measurements for sign area are to be based upon. Sign allowance is calculated per street frontage.

             Q. “Projecting sign” means a sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects from a structure or building face. A marquee sign shall not be considered a projecting sign.

             R. “Real estate sign” means a temporary sign erected by the owner or his agent advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located for rent, for lease or for sale, or directing to said property.

             S. “Roof sign” means a sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building or structure. Mansard roof signs shall not be included.

             T. “Sign” means any commercial communication device, structure or fixture, visible from a public right-of-way and using graphics, pictures, symbols or written copy, that is intended to aid an establishment or business in promoting the sale of a product, goods or services. For the purpose of this title, a sign shall not be considered to be building or structural design, national flags or flags of political subdivisions, symbolic flags or insignia of an institution, point of purchase product dispensers, holiday decorations, gravestones, historical site plaques, holiday displays, works of art, murals, and supergraphics as defined within this chapter, that contain no sign copy.

             U. “Sign copy” means words, letters, characters, illustrations, logos, graphics, symbols, writing or any combination thereof designated to communicate or attract attention to any activity, service, place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, merchandise or provide direction or identification for a premises, business, or facility.

             V. Measurement of Total Sign Area. The following method shall be utilized in calculating the square footage measurement of any freestanding, wall or projecting sign display:

             1. The square footage of any freestanding, wall or projecting sign shall be calculated by measuring inside the cabinet retainer area reserved for advertising copy or graphics only, including reader board spaces, by applying a set of straight lines around the visible opening of said sign cabinet.

             2. The square footage of any sign display made up of individual dimensional letters (illuminated or nonilluminated), words, graphic symbols or logos shall be measured around each individual letter or symbol by a straight line method and calculated by adding the sum of these individual letters/symbols together. To exclude architectural details or mounting features.

             3. Double-faced or multifaced signs shall be calculated as the maximum visible opening of one side only.

             4. For purposes of calculating the allowed sign area, the total allowance of wall, projecting and freestanding can be applied anywhere on the property or building.

             5. Signs painted or applied directly against the surface of a building shall have square footage calculated by the smallest polygon measurement enclosing the letters and/or symbols of the sign area.

             W. Sign, Area of – Ground. The area of all ground signs shall be measured by determining the sum of the area of each square, rectangle, triangle, portion of a circle, or any combination thereof, which creates the smallest single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign face, and that portion of the sign structure which exceeds one and one-half times the area of the sign face.

             X. “Sign height” means the vertical distance measured from the finished grade (as defined in Chapter  17.06  MVMC) to the highest point of a sign or, in the case of freestanding signs, to any vertical projection thereof including supporting columns.

             Y. “Supergraphics” means an artistic design theme which exceeds the size limits of this title by continuing the design beyond the actual boundaries of the sign message. That portion of the sign which contains letters and symbols must conform with the size limitations herein.

             Z. “Wall sign” means a sign attached or erected parallel to and extending not more than 18 inches from the facade or face of any building to which it is attached and supported throughout its entire length, with the exposed face of the sign parallel to the plane of said wall or facade. For the purpose of this title, signs incorporated into or attached to a mansard roof, signs on windows, and signs on awnings or canopies shall all be considered wall signs. (Ord. 3773 § 26, 2018).

        17.87.025  Applicability and permit required.

             A. Applicability. Signs may be erected, placed, established, painted, created or maintained only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions and other requirements of this chapter and other applicable city regulations. In the event of conflict between the regulations of this chapter and those of other local, state or federal regulations, the more restrictive regulation shall govern to the extent allowed by law. This chapter is not intended to regulate or dictate, in any manner, the content of speech or expression, or the viewpoint of the speaker.

             B. Permit Required. A sign permit is required for all signs unless specifically exempted elsewhere within this chapter. All sign permits shall contain the submittal materials outlined within Chapter  14.05  MVMC. (Ord. 3773 § 27, 2018).

        17.87.030  Residential districts (R-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and MHP) – General provisions.

             A. No off-premises signs are permitted except real estate directional signs.

             B. Real estate signs shall be limited to one per street frontage not exceeding six square feet in area per sign face.

             C. Signs identifying a detached or individual multifamily dwelling unit shall not exceed two square feet.

             D. No sign shall be permitted at or for a home occupation except as allowed in conjunction with an approved Type II home occupation permit.

             E. Internally illuminated signs are prohibited. (Ord. 3429 § 144, 2008).

        17.87.040  Residential districts – Additional provisions.

             A. Residential Agricultural (R-A). Signs in connection with the permitted uses of growing crops, sale of products and raising of livestock shall be limited to only one unlighted, double-faced sign having no more than eight square feet of area per face, with the exception of commercial nurseries serving the larger community which shall be subject to the provisions in MVMC  17.87.080 .

             B. Residential – Single-Family Detached and Attached (R-A, R-1 and R-2). Signs identifying a residential development may be permitted if such residential development contains more than nine separate lots, but only one such sign shall be allowed and it shall be located at the main entrance to the development. Sign face shall be limited to 25 square feet per sign face, and sign height shall not exceed five feet (pedestal sign).

             C. Residential – Multifamily and Mobile Home Park (R-3, R-4, and MHP). Signs are limited to one per street frontage and shall not exceed an area of 16 square feet per sign face. Pedestal signs may not exceed a sign height of five feet.

             D. Nonresidential uses existing or permitted through a conditional use or special use permit may exceed the sign requirements of this section through an administrative conditional use permit. (Ord. 3429 § 145, 2008).

        17.87.050  Public district (P).

             A. Only on-premises signs are permitted, except that off-premises signs may be permitted by an administrative conditional use permit; provided, that such signs shall not be detrimental to the surrounding area;

             Off-premises signs when used as a directory or identification of a multibuilding complex or a multitenant building with a total sign area not to exceed 80 square feet per sign face and not to exceed 15 feet in height;

             B. On-premises signs shall include freestanding signs, wall signs, marquee signs, projecting signs, and directional signs only.

             1. One freestanding sign with a total sign area of one square foot per lineal foot of street frontage not to exceed 120 square feet per sign face and not to exceed 20 feet in height;

             2. Wall signs and marquee signs shall not exceed a total of two square feet per lineal foot of building frontage, but at least 60 square feet of sign area shall be permitted; and

             3. A projecting sign may be used in lieu of a freestanding sign, but shall be limited to an area not to exceed 50 square feet per sign face;

             C. Changing message center signs or other similar electrically or electronically controlled sign with advertising shall be allowed subject to the following conditions:

             1. Location of property where sign is located shall be along a principal or minor arterial as defined by the city engineer;

             2. For locations adjacent to a residential use or district electronic displays shall be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;

             D. A comprehensive sign plan as described in MVMC  17.87.110  shall be required as a condition of approval for the master plan for this district. (Ord. 3321 § 4, 2006).

        17.87.060  Residential office district (R-O).

             A. Off-premises signs, except for temporary real estate directional signs, shall not be permitted;

             B. One identification sign not exceeding 20 square feet in sign area per sign face, and one directory sign not exceeding 15 square feet per sign face shall be permitted for each street frontage;

             C. Signs shall not be internally illuminated;

             D. Pedestal signs shall not exceed five feet in height. (Ord. 3429 § 146, 2008).

        17.87.065  Professional offices and health care development districts (P-O and H-C-D).

             A. Only on-premises signs are permitted, except that off-premises signs may be permitted by an administrative conditional use permit; provided, that such signs shall not be detrimental to the surrounding area:

             Off-premises signs when used as a directory or identification of a multi-building complex or a multi-tenant building with a total sign area not to exceed 80 square feet per sign face and not to exceed 15 feet in height.

             B. On-premises signs shall include freestanding signs, wall signs, marquee signs, projecting signs, and directional signs only:

             1. One freestanding sign not to exceed 50 square feet per sign face for each street frontage. Freestanding signs shall not exceed 15 feet in height;

             2. Wall signs and marquee signs shall not exceed a total of two square feet per lineal foot of building frontage, but at least 60 square feet of sign area shall be permitted; and

             3. A projecting sign may be used in lieu of a freestanding sign, but shall be limited to an area not to exceed 50 square feet per sign face.

             C. Multi-tenant buildings and multi-building complexes:

             1. The total allowable sign area for wall and marquee signs shall not exceed two square feet per lineal building frontage, but each business shall be allowed at least 60 square feet of sign area regardless of the length of the building frontage.

             2. One freestanding sign with a maximum sign area of 150 square feet per sign face and not to exceed 15 feet in height. Multiple freestanding signs per building within a multi-building complex may be permitted using the regulations under subsection (B)(1) of this section.

             D. Hospitals (reserved). (Ord. 3429 § 147, 2008).

        17.87.070  Central business district (C-1).

             Subject to the provisions of MVMC  17.87.170 , the following shall apply in all areas zoned C-1:

             A. Off-premises signs are prohibited.

             B. On-premises signs shall include wall signs, marquee signs and projecting signs only. A mansard roof sign shall be considered a wall sign in this district. Projecting signs shall be limited to one per street frontage and shall not exceed an area of 25 square feet per sign face.

             C. Wall signs and marquee signs shall not exceed a total sign area of two square feet per lineal foot of business frontage; except that if a business has only a wall sign, the sign area allowed shall be at least 60 square feet regardless of frontage.

             D. Wall signs and projecting signs shall be constructed of noncombustible materials, or wood of one-inch nominal thickness.

             E. One freestanding sign per business or complex may be permitted in the C-1b zone, and by an administrative conditional use permit in the C-1a zone if such sign will not be significantly detrimental to the purpose of encouraging pedestrian orientation in the subdistrict. The total allowable sign area shall not exceed two square feet of linear building frontage, not to exceed 40 square feet and not to exceed six feet in height.

             F. Public directory/directional signs located in the public right-of-way, established by the city, not exceeding 20 square feet in area and eight feet in height are permitted.

             G. When proposed signage replicates the original design and size of signage located on buildings that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Washington Heritage Register this signage shall be exempt from the sign type, number, size and height of signage otherwise permitted.

             H. Existing historic signage painted on buildings that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Washington Heritage Register shall not be counted as existing signage for a business wishing to install new signs to advertise their business. (Ord. 3773 § 28, 2018).

        17.87.080  General commercial, community commercial, and commercial limited industrial districts (C-2, C-3 and C-L).

             A. Only on-premises signs are permitted, except that off-premises signs may be permitted by conditional use permit; provided, that such signs shall not be detrimental to the surrounding area.

             B. Single-Tenant Building.

             1. One freestanding sign per lot with a total sign area of one square foot per lineal foot of street frontage not to exceed 150 square feet and not to exceed 30 feet in height;

             2. Lots that abut two public rights-of-way can be allowed one additional freestanding sign that meets the following size, height and location requirements:

             a. The second freestanding sign shall not exceed 36 square feet in size and shall be limited to 15 feet in height; and

             b. The two freestanding signs shall be at least 150 feet apart as measured by a straight line, or straight line elements, between the widest portions of the two signs.

             3. A projecting sign may be used in lieu of a freestanding sign, but shall be limited to one-half the area allowed for a freestanding sign on that frontage, and in no case shall exceed 50 square feet.

             4. Wall or marquee signs shall not exceed a total sign area of two square feet per lineal foot of building frontage, but at least 60 square feet of sign area shall be permitted.

             C. Multibuilding Complexes or Multitenant Buildings.

             1. One freestanding sign with a total sign area of one and one-half square feet of sign area per one foot of street frontage not to exceed 250 square feet per sign face and not to exceed 30 feet in height, and shall be at least 60 square feet regardless of frontage;

             2. For multitenant buildings there shall be not more than one freestanding or projecting sign per street frontage, except that if a complex has more than 300 lineal feet of street frontage, there shall be allowed one additional freestanding sign, not to exceed 150 square feet in area. The signs must be located at least 150 feet apart;

             3. Wall or marquee signs shall not exceed a total sign area of two square feet per lineal foot of building frontage, but at least 60 square feet of sign area shall be permitted.

             D. One freeway-oriented, freestanding sign per business may be permitted in lieu of other freestanding signs for the business; such sign shall be subject to the size limitations of subsections B and C of this section, whichever is applicable, and the height may be up to 60 feet.

             E. Changing message center signs or other similar electrically or electronically controlled signs with advertising shall be allowed subject to the following conditions:

             1. Location of the property where the sign is located shall be along a principal or minor arterial as defined by the city engineer;

             2. For locations adjacent to a residential use or district electronic displays shall be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

             F. Shopping centers approved by an administrative conditional use permit in the C-3 zone may have a 50 percent increase in the amount of signage allowed; provided, that a comprehensive sign plan is submitted and approved in accordance with MVMC  17.87.110 . (Ord. 3653 § 3, 2015).

        17.87.090  Neighborhood business district (C-4).

             A. Off-premises signs, except temporary real estate directional signs, are prohibited.

             B. On-premises signs shall be limited to one wall sign not to exceed 25 square feet in area and one freestanding sign not to exceed 50 square feet in area per sign face for each street frontage. Freestanding signs shall not exceed 15 feet in height. A marquee sign may be used in place of a wall sign. A projecting sign may be used in place of a freestanding sign. (Ord. 2352, 1989).

        17.87.100  Light manufacturing and commercial and industrial districts (M-1 and M-2).

             A. Only on-premises signs are permitted., except that off-premises signs with a sign area up to 250 square feet may be permitted by a conditional use permit.

             B. One freestanding sign per street frontage shall be permitted, with a maximum sign area of one square foot for each one foot of main street frontage, not to exceed 150 square feet. Sign height shall not exceed 20 feet. Wall or marquee signs shall not exceed a total sign area of two square feet per lineal foot of building frontage, but at least 60 square feet of sign area shall be permitted per street frontage.

             C. 1. One freestanding sign with a total sign area of one and one-half square feet of sign area per one foot of street frontage not to exceed 250 square feet per sign face and not to exceed 30 feet in height, and shall be at least 60 square feet regardless of frontage.

             2. For multitenant buildings there shall be not more than one freestanding or projecting sign per street frontage, except that if a complex has more than 300 lineal feet of street frontage, there shall be allowed one additional freestanding sign, not to exceed 150 square feet in area. The signs must be located at least 150 feet apart.

             D. One freeway-oriented, freestanding sign per business may be in lieu of other freestanding signs for the business; such sign shall be subject to the size limitations of subsections B and C of this section, whichever is applicable, and the height may be up to 60 feet.

             E. Changing message center signs or other similar electrically or electronically controlled sign with advertising shall be allowed subject to the following conditions:

             1. Location of the property where the sign is located shall be along a principal or minor arterial as defined by the city engineer;

             2. For locations adjacent to a residential use or district electronic displays shall be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 3429 § 149, 2008).

        17.87.110  Comprehensive sign plan.

             A. This section provides a mechanism under which special consideration can be given to signs which use a comprehensive sign plan to encourage the integration of signs into the framework of the building or buildings on the subject property. It is a requirement in a planned unit development and the public district master plan.

             B. The development services director will provide the proper application forms for a comprehensive sign plan which will require the following information:

             1. A narrative describing how the proposal is consistent with the criteria listed in subsection (C) of this section;

             2. A colored rendering of the proposed signs in relation to development in the area and on the subject property.

             C. The city may approve a proposed comprehensive sign plan if the following criteria are met:

             1. The proposal manifests exceptional effort toward creating visual harmony between the sign, buildings and other components of the subject property through the use of a consistent design theme;

             2. The signs are the minimum necessary to create readable signs from the rights-of-way providing direct vehicular access based on traffic speeds and patterns in the area of the subject property;

             3. The signs are in character and orientation with planned and existing uses in the area of the subject property. (Ord. 3092 § 63, 2002; Ord. 2967 § 1, 1999; Ord. 2352, 1989).

        17.87.120  Permits – Fees.

             A. All signage shall comply with the requirements of the Mount Vernon sign code. Any sign for which the city of Mount Vernon development services department has not issued a permit shall be removed or a permit shall be obtained by the owner and shall be made to conform to the current city of Mount Vernon sign code. It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge or relocate any such sign in the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit for each such sign from the building official. Normal maintenance on any sign shall not require a permit.

             B. A sign permit fee or building permit fee for each sign erected, installed, affixed, altered, relocated or created shall be as set forth in MVMC  15.04.180  as it is currently written or as it may be amended in the future. The plan review fee for a sign shall be 65 percent of the sign permit fee. The value of the sign and cost of installation shall be provided by the sign company installing the sign or owner of the property on which the sign is to be erected. If a sign company has not been hired to install the signage, the value of the installation shall be based on estimates from two local sign companies.

             C. Any person or firm installing a sign must first obtain a business license in the city of Mount Vernon. (Ord. 3773 § 30, 2018).

        17.87.130  Technical requirements.

             A. Signs containing electrical circuitry shall meet the standards of the National Electrical Code, all state laws, and an approved testing lab, such as Underwriters’ Laboratory, and shall be so labeled. The following lighting restrictions shall apply:

             1. No sign or illumination system shall contain or utilize:

             a. Any exposed incandescent lamp with a wattage in excess of 25 watts unless a dimmer or sun screen is attached;

             b. Any exposed incandescent lamp with an internal metallic reflector;

             c. Any exposed incandescent lamp with an internal reflector;

             d. Any revolving beacon light.

             2. Fluorescent lighting sources shall not exceed 800 milliamps.

             B. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the International Building Code. (Ord. 3201 § 30, 2004; Ord. 2352, 1989).

        17.87.140  Miscellaneous restrictions and requirements.

             A. Temporary signs for political candidates, issues or events shall be posted on private property only and removed within 10 days after the event or election is over.

             B. All temporary signs for any temporary events, including home or apartment sales or rentals, shall be removed within 10 days of the conclusion of the event.

             C. No projecting signs shall extend more than five feet over the public right-of-way and shall not extend closer than two feet from the face of the curb. All projecting signs shall have a minimum of eight feet clearance from grade to the lowermost portion of the sign.

             D. Signs shall not be included in the setback requirements for other uses.

             E. No sign shall be constructed in any district which constitutes a traffic hazard or detriment to traffic safety by reason of its size, location, movement, content, coloring or method of illumination or by obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstructing or detracting from the visibility of any official traffic control device by diverting or tending to divert the attention of drivers of moving vehicles from traffic movement on streets, roads, intersections or access facilities. No sign shall be erected that may obstruct the vision of pedestrians. Flashing or revolving red, green, blue or amber lights shall be prohibited on any sign. No sign shall use the words “Stop,” “Look,” “Drive-in,” “Danger,” or any other words, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.

             F. Noncommercial signs intended for the convenience of the public, which contain such information as “entrance,” “exit,” “restrooms,” “telephone,” “cocktails,” “restaurant,” etc., shall not be included in total sign area or number of signs allowed.

             G. No sign other than official public signs shall be located in the public right-of-way, except that temporary real estate directional signs for open house purposes may be displayed during the time that the property is actually open for public inspection.

             H. Any sign which was legally erected prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this title shall be permitted to remain as a nonconforming use so long as it is maintained in good repair. A permit must be obtained for each sign which requires structural alteration, replacement or relocation, and such sign must be brought into conformance with these provisions.

             I. Any on-premises sign which pertains to a product or service no longer offered on the premises where the sign is located shall be removed including posts, brackets, and other supporting structures within 60 days from the date that the product or service is no longer offered.

             J. Revolving signs may not exceed five R.P.M. and shall be permitted only when the message on each sign face is different.

             K. Special events such as festivals, carnivals, or grand openings or annual sales of retail establishments may be allowed to place temporary signs approved by the city for up to 14 days on a semiannual basis without a permit.

             L. On-site traffic directional signs are permitted, provided they do not exceed four square feet per face or three feet in height and do not carry any commercial message or identification.

             M. Temporary signs containing the message that the commercial or industrial real estate on which the sign is located (including buildings) is for sale, lease, or rent, together with information identifying the owner or agent are permitted. Such signs may not exceed 32 square feet in area, or eight feet in height, and shall be removed immediately after sale, lease, or rental. For lots of less than five acres, a single sign on each street frontage may be erected. For lots of five acres or more in area and having a street frontage in excess of 400 feet, a second sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area may be erected.

             N. Temporary Construction Site Identification Signs. Such signs may identify the project, the owner or developer, architect, engineer, contractor and subcontractors, and funding sources, and may contain related information including but not limited to sale or leasing information. Not more than one such sign may be erected per site, per street frontage, and it may not exceed 32 square feet in area.

             O. Other temporary signs not listed above or in this chapter shall be regarded and treated in all respects as permanent signs. Temporary signs shall not be included in calculating the total amount of permitted sign area.

             P. No more than 25 percent of the total sign allowance permitted under this chapter may be placed or transferred to a building wall that has no street frontage/sign allowance.

             Q. One nameplate per public entrance, per business, of no more than two square feet per face, which is suspended under a canopy and maintains a minimum clearance of seven feet in height above a public right-of-way, is exempt from the requirements of this chapter.

             R. Chapter  17.70  MVMC and its associated Design Standards Handbook contain sign requirements for areas in the historic downtown and surrounding areas that are required to be complied with.

             S. Permits for changing message center signs require the sign owner to execute a sign agreement to ensure their sign is, and remains, compliant with this chapter. (Ord. 3773 § 29, 2018).

        17.87.150  Signs specifically prohibited.

             Prohibited signs are as follows:

             A. Off-premises portable signs, except real estate signs, and except as otherwise provided for in this chapter.

             B. Roof signs.

             C. All trailer signs and other signs in excess of three square feet placed on a motor vehicle are prohibited. This shall not prohibit signs that are painted or magnetically attached to a currently licensed vehicle for purposes of identifying the business to which the vehicle is related.

             D. Signs that have flashing lights, search lights, flares, twirlers, propellers, pennants, banners, inflatable objects, and streamers are all prohibited.

             E. Any sign that rotates, turns or moves by electrical or mechanical means, flutters, or appears to move except as specifically allowed elsewhere within this code.

             F. Signs containing obscene or illegal matter. (Ord. 3773 § 31, 2018).

        17.87.155  Liquor Control Board’s rules.

             The city hereby adopts by reference the Washington State Liquor Control Board’s alcohol advertising regulations that are found in Chapter  314-52  WAC as they are currently written or as they may be amended in the future. In the case of a conflict between the MVMC and these rules the more restrictive regulations shall apply. (Ord. 3652 § 4, 2015).

        17.87.160  Noncompliance – Removal when.

             A. Erection or installation of any sign which is not in conformance with the provisions of this title shall be considered a violation of the zoning ordinance. The development services director shall require such sign to be corrected or removed within a specified period of time. When any sign is determined by the development services director to be in such condition that it may constitute a hazard to public safety, the development services director is authorized to remove the device without notice.

             B. Directional signs may be permitted only after review and approval by the development services director and the city engineer.

             C. Supergraphics painted directly onto a building wall may be permitted upon approval of the development services director to exceed the sign area allowance when it is established that such graphics would not detract from the purpose and intent of this title. (Ord. 3092 § 64, 2002; Ord. 2967 § 1, 1999; Ord. 2352, 1989).

        17.87.170  Portable signs.

             Portable signs are permitted, subject to the regulations set forth below, in the C-2 (general commercial), C-3 (community commercial), M-1 (light manufacturing), and M-2 (industrial) and in a portion of the C-1 (central business) district described as follows: Any property zoned C-1 (central business) and lying within that area north of Kincaid Street, south of Division Street, west of the Burlington Northern Railroad right-of-way, and east of the Skagit River; and along West Division between Wall Street and Ball Street.

             A. Size and Height. No sign shall exceed six square feet in area per face with a maximum height of three feet.

             B. Setbacks. Portable signs shall maintain a 15-foot side yard setback in all districts except the C-1 (central business) and shall not obstruct traffic visibility at street, highway, or driveway intersections.

             C. Location. Portable signs shall be located on the business premises advertised except in the C-1 (central business) district where they may be located in the adjacent public right-of-way and within 150 feet of the business premises provided the location does not create a hazard to pedestrian movement on the sidewalk, or the use of the adjacent street, including on-street parking spaces.

             D. Number of Signs Permitted.

             1. Single-Tenant Building. No more than one portable sign shall be allowed for each street frontage for any single-tenant building.

             2. Multibuilding Complexes or Multitenant Buildings. For multibuilding complexes or multitenant buildings no more than one portable sign shall be allowed for each 50 feet of continuous street frontage; provided, that a minimum 25-foot separation must be maintained between signs.

             E. Anchoring. All signs shall be physically anchored in a manner which both prevents the sign from being moved or blown over or away from its approved location and also allows for the prompt removal of the sign.

             F. Illumination. No portable identification sign may be illuminated.

             G. Hazard. No portable sign or associated apparatus shall be situated or used in a manner which creates a hazard to the public. The city retains the right to revoke any permit and to remove a portable sign that, in the judgment of the city officials, may create an accident or hazardous situation. The determination to remove a portable sign or revoke a permit for a portable sign may be appealed to the Mount Vernon city council by filing a written request therefor within 10 days of the removal of the sign or the revocation of the permit. The permit shall not be restored, nor the sign replaced, until a determination by the city council has been made.

             H. Permit and Permit Sticker Required. No portable sign may be installed or utilized without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Mount Vernon building official. Applications for permits may be made according to such procedures and upon such forms as may be established by the building official. A valid city-issued permit sticker shall be affixed to the sign in the location determined appropriate by the building official prior to installation of any portable sign. (Ord. 3201 §§ 32, 33, 2004; Ord. 2646 § 2, 1995).

        17.87.180  Bench signs.

             Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city may permit signs which are incorporated into benches located at designated stops for public transportation whether such stops are located on public or private property. Such signs may be no larger than the area reasonably necessary to accommodate a functional bench. No such sign may be displayed without first obtaining a permit from the building official. (Ord. 2652 § 1, 1995).