Chapter 17.35 HD HEALTH CARE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT

         Chapter 17.35
HD HEALTH CARE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT

             Sections:

              17.35.010    Purpose – Construction.

              17.35.020    Permitted uses.

              17.35.025    Accessory uses.

              17.35.027    Administrative conditional uses.

              17.35.030    Site development standards.

              17.35.040    Performance standards.

              17.35.050    Prohibited uses.

              17.35.060    Site plan review.

              17.35.070    Infrastructure improvements required.

        17.35.010  Purpose – Construction.

             A. The HD district has the following specific purposes:

             1. To reserve areas for, and promote, the development of hospitals and their related inpatient and outpatient medical facilities and unrelated physician offices, and clinics.

             2. To reserve areas that provide the underlying zoning needed to enable planning for medical campuses and economic growth of health care.

             3. To reserve areas for the concentration of medical facilities to enable the efficient provision of a wide spectrum of medical services.

             4. To promote uses that are intended to be functionally related to or serve medical uses or health care services.

             5. To allow continuation of existing single-family residential use while providing for an incremental transition to health care and related uses.

             6. The HD district designation is to be used exclusively for the health care development sub-area as set forth in the comprehensive plan, generally located in the vicinity bounded by 15th Street to the east, Division Street to the north, 11th Street to the west and East Broadway to the south. The area is intended to be used for medical and related uses and those uses compatible with and which support the medical community, patients and their families.

             B. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to implement the health care development district subarea plan as set forth in the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 3405 § 2, 2008).

        17.35.020  Permitted uses.

             A. Medical and health care uses including but not limited to hospitals, outpatient clinics, home health care offices, hospice services, laboratories, medical research facilities, emergency medical services and offices of doctors, dentists, physical therapists, health maintenance, counseling centers and treatment facilities and all other related medical and health care uses;

             B. Medical staff facilities and similar uses, including but not limited to educational and meeting facilities, and sleeping quarters;

             C. On lots fronting Division Street only, retail sales and services, including but not limited to pharmacies and convenience stores, gift shops, bookstores, newsstands, florists, medical and health care equipment sales;

             D. Existing single-family residential uses;

             E. Residential uses dependent upon or related to medical care, including but not limited to overnight facilities for patients and visitors;

             F. Neighborhood parks, open spaces, and community parks as part of a medical campus development; and

             G. Public, private, and commercial surface parking and commercial, public, and private parking garages, both on-site and off-site. (Ord. 3405 § 2, 2008).

        17.35.025  Accessory uses.

             A. Helicopter pads related to medical use and meeting the following conditions:

             1. The helipad shall be limited to emergency medical uses only.

             2. Noise from the helipad should be minimized using buffering combined with other operational and site design techniques to minimize the noise impact on surrounding uses.

             3. The health care development district shall take reasonable measures to ensure safety around the helipad when in use, and shall comply with all applicable FAA standards and regulations.

             4. The helipad should be located in a portion of the site in order to mitigate potential noise impacts of the residential districts.

             B. Day nursery facilities, when associated with a health care facility.

             C. Facilities for the permanent storage and/or disposal of biomedical, radioactive and other hazardous waste shall not be permitted; provided, however, that facilities for the treatment or temporary storage of biomedical, radioactive, and other hazardous waste generated within the health care development district, or by local publicly operated medical facilities related to the hospital, shall be permitted.

             D. Fuel storage for medical transportation facilities.

             E. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use.

             F. Residential facilities reasonably necessary for on-site housing of caretakers or security personnel.

             G. In a building or complex of buildings of which no less than 75 percent of the floor area is used for medical or health care purposes, retail sales and services intended to serve medical employees, hospital visitors and medical patients, including but not limited to pharmacies and convenience stores, gift shops, bookstores, florists, medical and health care equipment sales. (Ord. 3405 § 2, 2008).

        17.35.027  Administrative conditional uses.

             Restaurants, subject to the following development standards:

             A. The parking requirement for restaurants shall be one parking stall per 200 net square feet.

             B. All restaurants that abut a residential use or zone shall be closed for business no later than 10 p.m. every evening.

             C. Bars and drinking establishments are not allowed. It is recognized that restaurants may serve alcoholic beverages; however, the primary use of the building shall be as a restaurant. (Ord. 3429 § 82, 2008).

        17.35.030  Site development standards.

             A. Except as hereinafter provided, development requirements shall be as follows:

             1. Minimum lot area: none;

             2. Minimum lot width: none;

             3. Minimum front yard: 10 feet. Buildings on corner lots and through lots shall observe the minimum setback on both streets. For properties that front on an arterial, the minimum setback from the right-of-way shall be 25 feet. The community and economic development and public works directors can through a Type I decision process administratively reduce, for good cause shown, this setback;

             4. Minimum side/rear setback: none, except along any property line adjoining a residentially zoned district, with no intervening street or alley, there shall be a setback of 20 feet;

             5. Maximum height: 75 feet for hospitals; 45 feet for other buildings;

             6. Maximum floor area: none;

             7. Maximum lot coverage: 90 percent; with the exception of the hospital, including helipad facilities, no building shall exceed 60,000 square feet in floor area or encumber more than 40,000 square feet in lot area.

             B. Location of Retail Commercial Use. Freestanding retail sales shall be located only on lots fronting Division Street or as a secondary use in buildings in which no less than 75 percent of the floor area is utilized for medical or health purposes.

             C. Landscaping shall be required pursuant to the terms of Chapter  17.93  MVMC. (Ord. 3405 § 2, 2008).

        17.35.040  Performance standards.

             Access for all hospital users:

             A. Pedestrian connectivity throughout the district shall be maintained.

             B. Parking standards may be met through utilization of shared parking and off-site parking connected by pedestrian connection or shuttle.

             C. Emergency vehicle access and egress shall be assured. (Ord. 3405 § 2, 2008).

        17.35.050  Prohibited uses.

             A. Any use providing drive-in service unless related to a business providing medical goods or services, except for those fronting on Division Street.

             B. Adult entertainment.

             C. Any use providing sales or storage of gasoline or other automobile-related products with the exception of emergency vehicles.

             D. Telecommunications devices or towers that have been determined by the FCC to interfere with medical equipment.

             E. New residential, commercial or industrial, except as allowed by this chapter.

             F. Any use incompatible with the provision of health care services. (Ord. 3405 § 2, 2008).

        17.35.060  Site plan review.

             A proponent of development in this district may request the application of site plan review as set forth in Chapter  17.90  MVMC. (Ord. 3405 § 2, 2008).

        17.35.070  Infrastructure improvements required.

             The HD zone is located within a residential neighborhood area. As such, the infrastructure serving this zone will require substantial upgrades when developments are constructed to ensure that transportation and utility impacts are mitigated. (Ord. 3405 § 2, 2008).