Chapter 17.99 FENCES AND WALLS

         Chapter 17.99
FENCES AND WALLS

             Sections:

              17.99.010    Fences and walls – Installation restrictions generally.

              17.99.020    Barbed wire.

              17.99.030    Fences – Electrical permitted where – Restrictions.

              17.99.040    Fences and walls – Permit and application requirements.

        17.99.010  Fences and walls – Installation restrictions generally.

             Fences and walls can be installed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:

             A. In all residential zoned areas on corner, interior, through and reversed frontage lots, fences and walls may be installed up to four feet in height around the entire required front yard setback area. Fences and walls up to six feet in height may be installed around the remainder of the property with the following exceptions:

             1. Fences on corner and reverse frontage lots may be constructed up to a height of six feet along the secondary or additional street frontages provided the following conditions are met:

             a. The fence is set back 10 feet from the property line and does not extend beyond the required or existing setback of the dwelling located on the property; and

             b. The required 10-foot setback is landscaped with evergreen trees and shrubs, perennial plant materials, and groundcover. Up to 25 percent of the required evergreen trees may be deciduous to add seasonal color and texture variation.

             2. Fences along through lots adjacent to other through lots or corner and reverse frontage lots may be constructed up to a height of six feet along the secondary or additional street frontages provided the following conditions are met:

             a. The fence is set back 10 feet from the property line; and

             b. The required 10-foot setback is landscaped with evergreen trees and shrubs, perennial plant materials, and groundcover. Up to 25 percent of the required evergreen trees may be deciduous to add seasonal color and texture variation.

             3. Fences located on the additional street frontage of through lots adjacent to interior lots shall maintain the front yard setback of the interior lots.

             Fences and walls may be installed on property lines in residentially zoned lots. It shall be the property owner’s responsibility to determine the location of all property lines.

             B. In all other zones, fences and walls may be installed up to a height of eight feet; provided, that the following requirements are met:

             1. Where commercially or industrially zoned property has street frontage across from residential property, there shall be a setback of one foot for each foot in height of the fence or wall. This setback will be densely landscaped to provide a vegetative barrier. A landscaping plan will be submitted to and approved by the development services director prior to construction of the fence or wall. All installed landscaping materials will be maintained in a healthy state.

             2. A landscaped setback area shall not be required for fences or walls if the commercial or industrially zoned property adjoins or abuts similarly zoned property.

             C. Special regulations for all zones are as follows:

             1. Height shall be measured from the elevation of the highest finished grade at the base of the fence or wall.

             2. Height shall normally be limited to three feet within 30 feet of any street corner. This height may be reduced if vision clearance problems are created.

             3. No fence or wall may be constructed if it creates a hazard to users of the street or to nearby property.

             4. A minimum setback of five feet shall be maintained from any buildings on both sides of a property line.

             5. All fences and walls shall be maintained in a good state of repair.

             D. Chapter  17.70  MVMC and its associated Design Standards Handbook contains fence requirements for certain residential uses and areas in the historic downtown and surrounding areas that are required to be complied with. (Ord. 3773 § 32, 2018).

        17.99.020  Barbed wire.

             A. Fences incorporating barbed wire are only permitted to be installed as outlined below:

             1. On properties zoned commercial-limited industrial (C-L), light manufacturing and commercial district (M-1) and industrial district (M-2); and/or

             2. Surrounding a public utility, public facility; and/or

             3. Areas specifically approved to have barbed wire with a development agreement authorized under RCW  36.70B.170 , as it is currently written and as it may be amended in the future.

             B. All barbed wire fences shall comply with all the following requirements:

             1. The barbed wire shall be on top of a six-foot, or higher, solid or chain link fence.

             2. A minimum seven-foot-wide landscape screen shall be installed under the below-listed circumstances:

             a. When installed less than 20 feet from a public or private street; or

             b. When installed adjacent to or abutting a residential zone or use; or

             c. When installed adjacent to a park or public trail.

             3. The landscape screen shall be installed on the outside side of the fence (i.e., street or neighbor side).

             4. The 20-foot measurement from a street shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way or access easement, as applicable.

             5. The referenced landscape screen shall consist of a mix of two-inch caliper deciduous trees and five-foot evergreen trees 15 feet on center with minimum five-gallon shrubs and two-gallon ground cover installed. The shrubs and ground cover shall be installed at a density that will fill 85 percent of the seven-foot-wide landscaping strip within two years.

             6. No part of the fence or barbed wire may encroach over a property line or access easement.

             7. Razor wire, otherwise known as concertina wire, is prohibited. (Ord. 3882 § 3, 2023).

        17.99.030  Fences – Electrical permitted where – Restrictions.

             Electrical fences are permitted in the R-A district provided they comply with the following requirements:

             A. An electrical fence using an interrupted flow of current of intervals of about one second on and two seconds off shall be limited to 2,000 volts at 17 milliamp current.

             B. An electrical fence using continuous current shall be limited to 1,500 volts at seven milliamp current.

             C. All electrical fences shall be posted with permanent signs a minimum of 36 square inches in area at intervals of 100 feet, stating that the fence is electrified.

             D. Electrical fences manufactured by an established and reputable company and sold as a complete assembled unit carrying a written guarantee that complies with the requirements of this paragraph can be installed by an owner if the controlling elements of the installation carry a “U.L. Approved” seal. (Ord. 2352, 1989).

        17.99.040  Fences and walls – Permit and application requirements.

             Fence permits are required for all fences and walls constructed or repaired within the city. All permit applications shall include the required fee, a site plan, drawn to scale, indicating the design, location, and height of the fence or wall, a landscaping plan if applicable, and distance to existing buildings on the property. (Ord. 2926 § 3, 1998).