Chapter 17.66 HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT AND HISTORIC STRUCTURES

         Chapter 17.66
HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT AND HISTORIC STRUCTURES

             Sections:

              17.66.010    Intent.

              17.66.020    Designation of historic districts.

              17.66.030    Development standards in historic districts.

              17.66.040    Designation of historic structures.

              17.66.050    Establishment of historic advisory commission.

        17.66.010  Intent.

             This chapter establishes two mechanisms to preserve those areas of the city and specific sites or structures which have historic, cultural or architectural significance. The first, the historic overlay district, deals with areas of the city in which a majority of the existing structures reflect a significant era in the development of the community and contribute to the sense of history of the city. The second, historic structures, identifies and preserves those sites and structures which generally meet the criteria used in evaluating entries to the National Register under the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966. A majority of these sites are located with the historic districts. In addition, the city council may establish a historic advisory commission. (Ord. 2352, 1989).

        17.66.020  Designation of historic districts.

             A historic district shall be designated only after the following steps:

             A. The city council initiates the process, or a petition with the signatures of 60 percent of the property owners in the proposed district are received.

             B. The procedures of Chapter  17.111  MVMC concerning amendments and reclassifications shall be followed, including notification of all property owners within the district and 300 feet beyond the proposed district.

             C. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing concerning the formation of the district. A recommendation for approval of the district shall include the following:

             1. A description of the boundaries of the area that define the physical extent and limitations sufficient to identify its location;

             2. A description of historical significance that includes a description of the area’s architectural and/or cultural context and why it is of historical interest;

             3. Identification of the property or properties within the area that contribute to its unique historical character;

             4. Overall objectives for the preservation of the district and development and design standards for the historic, cultural or architectural features within the area. The above findings shall be incorporated into the ordinance(s) establishing the district.

             D. The city council shall take action only upon a recommendation of approval of the planning commission, unless appealed. Changes to the district boundaries shall follow the same procedures. (Ord. 2352, 1989).

        17.66.030  Development standards in historic districts.

             A. All property located in an historic district shall be subject to all of the use restriction and development standards of the underlying zoning district as minimum standards.

             B. Exterior alterations of or additions to property and structures in historic districts shall require special review by the planning department to ensure conformance with the standards of the district. A permit shall be issued unless the review shows that the alteration or addition will significantly change the historical or architectural character of the building.

             C. Any decision to deny or require changes to the permit application may be appealed to the planning commission. Decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council.

             D. For the purpose of this section, new construction shall mean all construction other than alteration of or addition to an existing structure. The placement of any structure on property in an historic district not attached to an existing structure shall constitute new construction. All new construction in a historic district requires a permit from the planning commission. The planning commission shall approve a permit only if it finds that its size, scale and design are of a character consistent with the historic designation of the district. (Ord. 2352, 1989).

        17.66.040  Designation of historic structures.

             The city council may from time to time designate structures within and outside of historic districts as historic structures in accordance with the following criteria:

             A. The property contains an object, improvement or site that is more than 40 years old and that possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association, and:

             1. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad pattern of national, state or local history, or

             2. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in national, state or local history, or

             3. Embodies other distinctive characteristics of a type, period, style or method of design or construction, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction, or

             4. Has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in prehistory or history, or

             5. Is an outstanding work of a designer or builder who has made a substantial contribution to the art;

             B. The property contains an object, improvement or site which does not meet the criteria listed in subsection (A) of this section but which is:

             1. A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or artistic distinction or historic importance, or

             2. A building or structure removed from its original location but which is significant primarily for its architectural value or which is the surviving structure most importantly associated with an historic person or event, or

             3. A birthplace, grave or residence of an historic figure of outstanding importance if there is no other appropriate site or building directly associated with his/her productive life, or

             4. A cemetery that derives its primary significance from graves of persons or transcendent importance from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events, or

             5. A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a restoration master plan, and when no other building or structure with the same association has survived, or

             6. A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age, tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own historic significance, or

             7. A property achieving significance within the past 40 years if it is of exceptional importance;

             C. Development standards for designated historic structures shall be the same as MVMC  17.66.030 (B) and (C). Emphasis will be placed on the preservation of the elements of the site or structure defined in the criteria designation. (Ord. 2352, 1989).

        17.66.050  Establishment of historic advisory commission.

             The city council may establish a seven member historic advisory commission or designate an existing organization to provide advice to the planning commission and city council on the designation of historic districts and historic structures and to the development services director in the application of development standards. (Ord. 3092 § 42, 2002; Ord. 2967 § 1, 1999; Ord. 2352, 1989).