Ch. 19.12 Definitions and Interpretation | Anacortes Municipal Code

 Skip to main content

		Loading…

	 Anacortes, WA

		Municipal Code

				   Home

					   Title 19 Div. 1

					   Title 19 Div. 1

					   Ch. 19.14

			 Toggle site navigation

			 Menu

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 1, General and Legislative Provisions
  Ch. 19.12, Definitions and Interpretation

						   Home

							   Contents

						   Track

							Legislative History

								Historic Versions

								Pending Updates

								Recent Updates

						   Share

							This Page

							Your Selections

						   Settings

						   Help

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 1, General and Legislative Provisions
  Ch. 19.12, Definitions and Interpretation

	    Chapter 19.12   DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION   Revised

			 Search Within This

	   This chapter is included in your selections.

 Sections:

   19.12.020   Definitions.  Revised

   19.12.040   Rules of interpretation.

   19.12.060   Supremacy.

   19.12.080   Administrative interpretation.

    19.12.020   Definitions.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

			This section was recently amended by Ordinance 5014, codified in February 2026.

			This section was recently amended by Ordinance 4092, codified in April 2026.

 The following definitions apply to this title, and other definitions may be found in individual chapters when applicable to that chapter:

   A.   A Definitions.

 “ A-board ” means a type of  sign  as defined in AMC  19.67.030 .

 “ Access corridor ” means a vehicle circulation area in private ownership which provides access to a single  flag lot .

 “ Accessory dwelling unit  ( ADU )” means a second small  dwelling  on the same  lot  as a  single-family dwelling  and meeting the requirements of AMC  19.47.030(C) .

 “ Accessory structure ” means a type of  structure  as defined in AMC  19.47.020 .

 “ Accessory use ” means a use incidental and subordinate to the  principal use  and located on the same  lot  or in the same  building  as the  principal use . See AMC Chapter  19.47 ,  Accessory Uses  and  Structures , for applicable standards.

 “ Active recreation ” means a mix of uses that includes the following facilities or facility types: athletic fields,  buildings  or  structures  for active recreational activities, fitness centers, swimming pools, community gardens, courts, children’s play areas, formally developed dog play areas, and other similar  structures  or  development , and may include related uses such as  retail  and concession stands related to the  principal use .

  Adult Concessions . See AMC  5.35.030  for definitions pertaining to  adult concession  which by this reference are adopted for and applicable to AMC Title  19  to the extent used therein.

 “ Adult family home ” means a group living use as defined in AMC  19.43.120 .

 “ Adverse impact ” means an unwanted and unanticipated result of taking a particular action or a negative effect that goes against desired conditions.

 “ Advertise ” means to describe or draw attention to a product, service, or event in a public medium in order to promote sales or attendance.

 “ Affordable housing ” means, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, residential housing whose monthly costs, including utilities other than telephone, do not exceed 30 percent of the monthly income of a  household  whose income is:

        1.   For rental housing, 60 percent of the median  household  income adjusted for  household  size, for the county where the  household  is located, as reported by the United States  Department  of Housing and Urban  Development ; or

        2.   For owner-occupied housing, 80 percent of the median  household  income adjusted for  household  size for the county where the  household  is located, as reported by the United States  Department  of Housing and Urban  Development .

 “ AKART ” means all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment.

 “ Alterations ” means a change or rearrangement of the structural parts of existing facilities, or an enlargement by extending the sides or increasing the height or depth, or the moving from one location to another.

 “AMC” means the Anacortes Municipal Code.

 “ Appellant ” means a  person  who files a complete and timely appeal of a  city   decision .

 “ Appellate body ” means that officer or body prescribed by this title as having the authority to hear the appeal of a  development permit .

 “ Applicant ” means a  person  seeking  development  or permit approval from the  city .

 “ Articulation ” means the giving of emphasis to architectural elements (like windows, balconies, entries, etc.) that create a complementary pattern or rhythm, dividing large  buildings  into smaller identifiable pieces. See AMC  19.63.040  for  articulation  provisions.

 “ Articulation interval ” means the measure of  articulation , the distance before architectural elements repeat. See AMC  19.63.040  for  articulation  provisions.

 “ Artisan manufacturing ” means a light manufacturing use as defined in AMC  19.45.030(B) .

 “ Assisted living facility ” means a type of group living use as defined in AMC  19.43.130 .

   B.   B Definitions.

 “ Basement ” means that portion of a  building  below the  ground floor  having less than four feet of clearance from its ceiling to the average finished  grade  of the  building  perimeter.

 “ Bed and breakfast establishment ” means an overnight lodging use as defined in AMC  19.44.050(B) .

 “ Best management practice  ( BMP )” means the schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and structural and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce the release of pollutants and other  adverse impacts  to waters of Washington State.

 “ Binding site plan ” means a drawing to scale specified by AMC Chapter  19.32 , Land Divisions, which: (1) identifies and shows the areas and locations of all streets, roads, improvements, utilities,  open spaces , and any other matters specified by local regulations; (2) contains inscriptions or attachments setting forth such appropriate limitations and conditions for the use of the land as are established by the  city  of Anacortes; and (3) contains provisions making any  development  be in conformity with the  site plan .

 “ Bioretention BMP ” means engineered facilities that store and treat  stormwater  by passing it through a specified soil profile, and either retain or detain the treated  stormwater  for flow attenuation.

 “ Blank wall ” means a  ground floor   wall  or portion of a  ground floor   wall  as described in AMC  19.63.070(B)  that does not include a transparent window or door.

 “ Block ” means a parcel of land bounded on all sides by  city  streets, which may be divided by an alley, and generally comprised of individual  building   lots .

 “ Block frontage ” refers to the area between a street and  building   facades  and other portions of a  lot  close to the street property line. This includes both  streetscape  elements (planting strips and sidewalks), street  setbacks , and  building   facades . See AMC Chapter  19.61 ,  Block Frontage  Standards, for applicable standards.

 “ Boundary line adjustment ” means the adjustment of a boundary line between existing  lots .

 “ Building ” means any  structure  used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

 “ Building frontage ” refers to the  facade  or street-facing elevation of a  building . For  buildings  not adjacent to a street, it refers to the  building  elevation(s) that features the primary entrance to the uses within the  building . Depending on the context the term is used in, it may also refer to the uses within the  building . For example, a  storefront  is a type of  building frontage .

  Building Height . See AMC  19.42.120  for  building height  calculations, exceptions, and modifications.

  Building Site . See “ Site area .”

 “ Burden of proof ” means a party’s duty to prove an assertion or charge.

 “ Business or commerce ” means the purchase, sale, offering for sale, or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service, substance, or commodity for livelihood or profit.

   C.   C Definitions.

 “ Cannabis ” means all parts of the plant  cannabis , whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. For the purpose of this title, “ cannabis ” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. The term “ cannabis ” includes  cannabis products  and useable  cannabis .

 “ Cannabis products ” means products that contain  cannabis  or  cannabis  extracts, have a measurable THC concentration greater than three-tenths of one percent, and are intended for human consumption or application, including, but not limited to, edible products, tinctures, and lotions. The term “ cannabis products ” does not include useable  cannabis . The definition of “ cannabis products ” as a measurement of THC concentration only applies to the provisions of this title and must not be considered applicable to any criminal laws related to  marijuana  or  cannabis .

 “ Cargo container ” means a type of temporary use defined in AMC  19.48.020(C) .

 “ Carport ” means a protective covering for a  parking space  open on two or more sides, also categorized under the term “ garage .”

 “ Car-sharing provider ” means a membership-based and licensed business that offers use of motor vehicles 24 hours a  day  and seven  days  a week to members who reserve vehicles in advance, and that charges members for the time and/or miles.

 “ Certificate of occupancy ” means a permit to occupy a premises issued after inspection has verified compliance with the requirements and provisions of this title and applicable  building  codes.

 “ City ” means the  city  of Anacortes, Washington.

 “ City Council ” means the duly elected  City Council  of the  city  of Anacortes.

 “ City’s NPDES permit ” means the current Western Washington Phase II Municipal  Stormwater  Permit issued by the  Department  of Ecology pursuant to the  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System .

 “ Closed record appeal ” means an administrative appeal on the record to a  local government  body or officer, including the legislative body, following an  open record hearing  on a  project permit application  when the appeal is on the record with no or limited new evidence or information allowed to be submitted and only appeal argument allowed.

 “ Co-living housing ” refers to a type of  household  living use as defined in AMC  19.43.115 .

 “ Commission ” means the  Planning Commission  for the purposes of this title.

 “ Comprehensive plan ” means the  city ’s  comprehensive plan  adopted pursuant to Chapter  36.70A  RCW.

 “ Comprehensive plan amendment ” means an amendment or change to the text or maps of the  comprehensive plan .

 “ Conditional use ” means a use that requires a  conditional use  permit (CUP) and that may be restricted as a condition of approval.

 “ Cornice ” means a horizontal molding projecting along the top of a  wall ,  building , etc. See AMC  19.63.050(D)  for related standards.

 “ Cottage dwelling ” refers to a type of  household  living use as defined in AMC  19.43.040 .

  Council . See “ City Council .”

   D.   D Definitions.

 “ Day ” means calendar  day , not business  day , unless otherwise specified. See AMC  1.04.070 , Computation of time.

 “ Day care ” means a commercial use as defined in AMC  19.44.010 .

 “ Decision ” means the written report of findings and conclusions issued by the  decision-maker .

 “ Decision-maker ” means that officer or body prescribed by this title as having the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a permit under this title or hear an appeal and issue a revised  decision .

 “ Department ” means the  City  of Anacortes Planning, Community, and Economic  Development   Department .

 “ Departure ” means a provision allowing for  applicants  to propose alternative means of compliance with a specific standard on a voluntary basis, provided they meet the purpose of the standard. See AMC  19.20.220  for more information on  departures .

 “ Detached building ” means a  building  surrounded on all sides by  open space  and not physically connected to any other  building .

 “ Development ” means any land use, activity, or project regulated by AMC Titles  13  and   16  through  20  , including but not limited to  building  permits,  subdivisions ,  binding site plans ,  rezones ,  conditional use  permits,  shoreline permits ,  short plats , or  variances .

 “ Development permit ” means a permit or approval for a  development , and includes  project permits  per RCW  36.70B.020  and permits issued pursuant to  AMC  Chapter  19.14 .

 “ Development site ” means that portion of any  lot  or  lots  that encompass all phases of a  development  proposal.

 “ Director ” means the  Director  of the Planning, Community and Economic  Development   Department  or the  Director ’s designee.

 “ Division of land ” means any transaction or action, not otherwise exempt or provided for under the provisions of this title, which  alters  or affects the shape, size or legal description of any part of an owner’s land as defined in this section. Sale of a condominium apartment and rental or lease of a  building , facility or  structure  which does not  alter  or affect the legal description of an owner’s land does not constitute a  division of land .

 “ Drive-in ” or “ drive-through restaurant ” or “ refreshment stand ” means any place or premises used for the sale, dispensing, or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages to customers in vehicles, including those establishments where customers may serve themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments, or beverages on or off the premises.

 “ Duplex dwelling ” refers to a type of  household  living use as defined in AMC  19.43.050 .

 “ Dwelling unit ” or “ dwelling ” means a  building  or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping facilities for one  family . A “ dwelling unit ” does not include a  motel  or  hotel , which is separately defined.

   E.   E Definitions.

 “ Effective date ” means the date a  final decision  becomes effective.

 “ Effective impervious surface ” means those  impervious surfaces  that are connected via sheet flow or discrete conveyance to a drainage system.

 “ Essential public facility  ( EPF )” means any public facility or facilities owned or operated by a  unit  of local or state government, public or private utility, transportation company, or any other entity that provides a public service as its primary mission, and is difficult to site.  EPFs  include those facilities listed in RCW  36.70A.200 .

 “ Expiration of application ” means a  decision  to expire an application per  AMC   19.20.110 .

   F.   F Definitions.

 “ Facade ” means the entire street  wall  face of a  building  extending from the  grade  of the  building  to the top of the parapet or eaves and the entire width of the  building  elevation.

 “ Family ” means one or more  persons , either related or unrelated, living together as a single housekeeping  unit , sharing common living, cooking, and eating facilities.

 “ Fence ” means a  structure  which is built, constructed, or composed of parts joined together of material in some definite manner, in which the prime purpose is to separate and divide, partition, enclose or screen a parcel or parcels of land.

 “ Final decision ” means the final  city  action, in writing, to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a permit application.

 “ Final plat ” means a precise scale drawing of a  subdivision  and dedications which conforms to the approved  preliminary plat , meets all the conditions of approval, and meets the requirements of the Skagit County Auditor for recording.

 “ Final short plat ” means a precise scale drawing of a  short subdivision  and dedications which conforms to the approved  preliminary short plat , meets all conditions of approval, and meets the requirements of the Skagit County Auditor for recording.

 “ Flood ” means the water of any watercourse or drainway which is above the bank or outside the channel and banks of such watercourse or drainway.

 “ Floor ” means the same thing as “ story .”

 “ Floor area, gross  ( GFA )   ” means the floor area within the inside perimeter of the exterior  walls  of the  building  under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, ramps, closets, the thickness of interior  walls , columns, or other features. The floor area of a  building , or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior  walls  shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or  floor  above. The  gross floor area  does not include shafts with no openings or interior courts.

 “ Floor area, net  ( NFA )   ” means the actual occupied area, not including unoccupied accessory areas such as corridors, stairways, ramps, toilet rooms, mechanical rooms, and closets. Shared residential storage areas and commercial and industrial storage/stock areas are considered occupied areas for the purpose of this definition.

 “ Freestanding sign ” means a type of  sign  as defined in AMC  19.67.030 .

   G.   G Definitions.

 “ Garage ” means a sheltered or enclosed accessory space used for the storage of motor vehicles,  recreational vehicles , or boats. The term “ garage ” includes  carports .

 “ Garage sale ” means all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential zone for the purpose of disposing of personal property.

 “ Gateway block frontage ” refers to a type of  block frontage  designation that emphasizes  landscaping  on frontages facing State Route 20. See AMC  19.61.100  for details.

 “ General-service establishment ” refers to a type of commercial use category defined in AMC  19.44.020(A) .

 “ Grade ” means the level of the surface of the ground.

 “ Grading ” means any excavating or filling, or combination thereof, of land.

 “ Gross acre ” means acreage plus one-half the width of abutting  right-of-way  of streets and alleys.

 “ Ground floor ” means the first  floor  of any  building  nearest, on, or above the same plane as the fronting  right-of-way .

 “ Groundcover   ” means small plants such as salal, ivy, ferns, mosses, grasses, or other types of vegetation which normally cover the ground.

 “ Groundwater ” means water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the land surface or a surface waterbody.

 “ Grubbing ” means the removal of  trees , shrubs, stumps and rubbish from the project site.

   H.   H Definitions.

 “ Hard surface area ” means an  impervious surface , a  permeable pavement , or a vegetated roof.

 “ Heavy industry ” means a land use category as defined in AMC  19.45.010(A) .

 “ Hedge ” means  trees , vines, and/or shrubs which are planted in a substantially uniform configuration, grown and joined together in some definite manner and generally pruned to a uniform shape, creating a substantial barrier to sight.

 “ Home occupation ” means a type of  accessory use  as defined in AMC  19.47.040 .

 “ Hospital ” means a type of medical use as defined in AMC  19.44.030(C) .

 “ Hotel ” or “ motel ” means a type of overnight lodging use as defined in  19.44.050(C) .

 “ Household ” has the same meaning as “ family .”

   I.   I Definitions.

 “ Illicit discharge ” means any discharge to the  stormwater  system that is not composed entirely of  stormwater  or of “allowable discharges” as adopted in AMC  18.30.050 .

 “ Impervious surface ” means a nonvegetated surface area which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions prior to  development . A nonvegetated surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow present under natural conditions prior to  development .

 “ Improved public street ” means a  platted   public street , paved to  city  standards and specifications.

 “ Incidental sign ” means a type of  sign  as defined in AMC  19.67.030 .

 “ Infiltration device or facility ” means a drainage device or facility designed to use the hydrologic process of surface and  stormwater  runoff soaking into the ground, commonly referred to as percolation, to dispose of surface and  stormwater  runoff.

   J.   J Definitions.

 “ Junkyard ” means a  lot , land, or  structure , or part thereof, used for the collecting, storage, and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, used  building  materials, or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, salvaging or sale of parts of machinery, or vehicles not in running condition. “ Junkyard ” includes auto wreckage yards or storage yards for wrecked automobiles.

   K.   K Definitions.

 “ Kennel ” means a type of  personal service  use as defined in AMC  19.44.080 . Also see AMC  6.06.090 , Commercial  kennels , catteries, pet shops and animal shelters—General conditions, for applicable standards.

   L.   L Definitions.

 “ Land clearing ” means the act of removing or destroying  trees  or  groundcover .

 “ Land-disturbing activity ” means any activity that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil topography.  Land-disturbing activities  include, but are not limited to, clearing,  grading , filling, and excavation. Compaction that is associated with stabilization of  structures  and road construction shall also be considered a  land-disturbing activity . Vegetation maintenance practices, including  landscape  maintenance and gardening, are not considered  land-disturbing activity .  Stormwater facility  maintenance is not considered  land-disturbing activity  if conducted according to established standards and procedures.

 “ Landmark building ” means a  structure  recognized as historic or architecturally significant through designation on a local, state, or national historic register.

 “ Landscape ” and “ landscaped area ” mean an inclusive combination of  trees , shrubs, flowers, ferns,  groundcover , and other vegetation as defined in AMC  19.65.030 .

 “ Landscaped block frontage ” refers to a type of  block frontage  designation that emphasizes  landscaped   setbacks . See AMC  19.61.070  for details.

 “ Light industry ” means a land use category as defined in AMC  19.45.020(A) .

 “ Live-work dwelling unit ” refers to a type of  household  living use defined in AMC  19.43.100 .

 “ Loading space ” means an off-street space or berth on the same  lot  with a  building , for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley, parking  lot  or other appropriate means of access.

 “ Local government ” means a county,  city , or town.

 “ Local improvement district ” means an area comprised of a specific set of properties which are subject to a special property tax assessment after  City Council  action by ordinance pursuant to state statutes.

 “ Long subdivision ” means the division or redivision of land into 10 or more  lots  for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership.

 “ Lot ” means a fractional part of divided lands having fixed boundaries, being of sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum zoning requirements for width and area. The term includes  tracts  or parcels.

 “ Lot coverage ” means the area of a  lot  which is covered by  buildings  and  structures . See AMC  19.42.110  for a clarification of how  lot coverage  standards established by AMC Chapter  19.42 , Form and Intensity Standards, are applied.

 “ Lot frontage ” means the portion of the property line which abuts a street  right-of-way .

 “ Lot of record ” means a  lot  which is described by a  final plat ,  short plat , or metes and bounds, and is established consistent with applicable local and state regulations at the date a legal instrument creating the  lot  is recorded at the Skagit County Auditor’s office.

  Lot  Types. The diagram in Figure 19.12.020(L) illustrates terminology used in this title with reference to  corner lots ,  interior lots , and  through lots .

        1.   “ Corner lot ” means a  lot  located at the intersection of two or more streets. A  lot  abutting a curved street or streets must be considered a  corner lot  if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side  lot  lines to the foremost point of the  lot  meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.

        2.   “ Interior lot ” means a  lot  with frontage on only one street.

        3.   “ Through lot ” means a  lot  other than a  corner lot  with frontage on more than one street.  Through lots  abutting two streets may be referred to as double frontage  lots .

        4.   “ Flag lot ” means a parcel of land, the body of which is separated from a  public street  by one or more  lots , connected to a  public street  by a narrow portion (flagpole) of the parcel. See AMC  19.42.130(F)  for  flag lot   setback  standards.

        5.   “ Shared-access lot ” means a group of  lots  sharing a driveway. See AMC  19.54.040(E)  for  shared-access lot  standards.

   Figure 19.12.020(L)
 Types of lots.

 “ Low impact development  ( LID )” means a  stormwater  and land use management strategy that strives to mimic the predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing the following techniques:

        1.   Conservation.

        2.   Use of on-site natural features.

        3.   Site planning.

        4.   Distributed  stormwater   best management practices  ( BMPs ) integrated into a project design.

 Common  LID BMPs  include, but are not limited to: bioretention,  rain gardens ,  permeable pavements , roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, minimal excavation foundations, vegetated roofs, water reuse, and rainwater harvesting.

 “ Low impact development best management practice  ( LID BMP )” means distributed  stormwater  management practices, integrated into a project design, that emphasize predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation, and transpiration.  LID BMPs  include, but are not limited to: bioretention,  rain gardens ,  permeable pavements , roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, minimal excavation foundations, vegetated roofs, and water reuse.

 “ Low impact development principles ” means land use management strategies that emphasize conservation, use of on-site natural features, and site planning to minimize  impervious surfaces ,  native vegetation  loss, and  stormwater  runoff.

   M.   M Definitions.

 “ Major transit stop ” has the same meaning as RCW  36.70A.030(27) .

 “ Major utility ” means a type of utilities use as defined in AMC  19.46.040(A) .

 “ Manufactured home ” refers to a type of  household  living use as defined in AMC  19.43.110 .

 “ Marijuana ” means all parts of the plant  cannabis , whether growing or not. See also “ Cannabis .”

 “ Marine block frontage ” refers to a type of  block frontage  designation that emphasizes use of either the  storefront  or  landscaped block frontage  standards but which also offers greater flexibility in site orientation. See AMC  19.61.090  for details.

 “ Medical office ” means a type of medical use as defined in AMC  19.44.030 .

 “ Minimum requirement ” means a technical  minimum requirement  described in Volume 1 of the  Stormwater Management Manual  for Western Washington (SWMMWW) and Appendix 1 of the  city’s NPDES permit .

 “ Minor utility ” means a type of utilities use as defined in AMC  19.46.040(B) .

 “ Mixed block frontage ” refers to a type of  block frontage  designation that allows use of either the  storefront  or  landscaped block frontage  standards. See AMC  19.61.080  for details.

 “ Mixed-use ” means a  development  that has a mix of uses such as but not limited to residential, office,  retail , civic, dining, institutional, and industrial.

 “ Modulation ” means stepping forward or backward a portion of the  facade  as a means to articulate or add visual interest to the  facade .

  Motel . See “ Hotel .”

 “ Multifamily dwelling ” refers to a type of  household  living use as defined in AMC  19.43.080 .

 “ Multifamily restricted dwelling ” refers to a type of  household  living use as defined in AMC  19.43.090 .

 “ Municipal service facility ” means a type of general-service use as defined in AMC  19.44.020(D) .

 “ Museum ” means a type of civic use as defined in AMC  19.46.020(C)(4) .

   N.   N Definitions.

 “ National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System  ( NPDES )” means the part of the federal Clean Water Act that requires point source dischargers to obtain permits. These permits are referred to as  NPDES  permits and, in Washington State, are administered by the Washington State  Department  of Ecology.

 “ Native vegetation ” means vegetation composed of plant species, other than noxious weeds, that are indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest and which reasonably could have been expected to naturally occur on the site. Examples include  trees  such as Douglas fir, western hemlock, western red cedar, alder, bigleaf maple, and vine maple; shrubs such as willow, elderberry, salmonberry, and salal; and herbaceous plants such as sword fern, foam flower, and fireweed.

 “ Neighborhood grocery store ” means a type of  retail  sales use as defined in AMC  19.44.120(E) .

 “ Nonconforming ” or “ preexisting nonconforming ” means a use or  structure  that was legally established when it was commenced or constructed but does not conform to laws or rules that were subsequently adopted.

 “ Nursery ” means a type of agriculture use as defined in AMC  19.46.010(E) .

 “ Nursing home ” means a type of group living use as defined in AMC  19.43.140 .

   O.   O Definitions.

 “ Open record appeal hearing ” means an  open record hearing  held on an appeal if no predecision hearing has been held on the  project permit .

 “ Open record hearing ” means a hearing conducted by a single hearing body or officer authorized by the  city  to conduct such hearings, that creates the  city ’s record through testimony and submission of evidence and information, under procedures prescribed by the  city  by ordinance or resolution.

 “ Open record predecision hearing ” means an  open record hearing  held prior to the  city ’s  decision  on a  project permit .

 “ Open space ” means that part of a property which is unobstructed by  structures  from the ground upward, unless otherwise noted for internal  open space  provisions in AMC  19.62.040 .

 “ Operational source control BMP ” means a schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, and other managerial practices to prevent or reduce pollutants from entering  stormwater .

   P.   P Definitions.

 “ Parking space ” means an off-street space plus room to enter and exit the space that is used temporarily to park a motor vehicle, and which has access to a  public street  or alley.

 “ Party of record ” means a  person  who has testified at a public hearing, or submitted a written statement related to an application within the allowed time frame, and who provides the  city  with a complete mailing address.

 “ Passive recreation ” means a mix of uses on undeveloped land (including wetland buffers) or minimally improved lands which includes the following: naturally  landscaped areas , nonlandscaped green spaces, picnic areas, water bodies, trails, interpretive trails and other similar  structures  or  development .

 “ Pedestrian-oriented space ” means publicly accessible spaces that enliven the pedestrian environment by providing opportunities for outdoor dining, socializing and relaxing and that provide visual amenities that can contribute to the character of the neighborhood. See AMC  19.62.040(D)  for  pedestrian-oriented space  design criteria.

 “ Permanent sign ” means a type of  sign  as defined in AMC  19.67.030 .

 “ Permeable pavement ” means pervious concrete, porous asphalt, permeable pavers, or other forms of pervious or porous paving material intended to allow passage of water through the pavement section. It often includes an aggregate base that provides structural support and acts as a  stormwater  reservoir.

 “ Permitted use ” means any use authorized or permitted alone or in conjunction with another use in a specific zone and subject to the limitations of the regulations of such zone.

 “ Person ” means and includes a human being or legal entities such as corporations, partnerships, etc.

 “ Personal service ” means a category of land uses as defined in AMC  19.44.080(A) .

 “ Pervious surface ” means any surface material that allows  stormwater  to infiltrate into the ground. Examples include lawn,  landscape , pasture,  native vegetation  areas, and  permeable pavements .

 “ Place of assembly ” means a place for groups of  people  to gather for an event or scheduled program. Examples include both civic or public uses (see AMC  19.46.020 ) or commercial recreation uses (see AMC  19.44.090  and  19.44.100 ).

 “ Planning Commission ” means the duly appointed  Planning Commission  of the  city .

 “ Plat ” means a scale drawing of a  subdivision  showing  lots ,  blocks , streets, or  tracts , or other division or dedications of land to be subdivided.

 “ Pole sign ” means a type of  freestanding sign  as defined in AMC  19.67.030 .

 “ Portable sign ” means a type of  freestanding sign  as defined in AMC  19.67.030 .

 “ Preliminary plat ” means a neat and approximate scale drawing of a proposed  subdivision , showing the existing conditions and the proposed layout of streets,  lots ,  blocks , and other information needed to properly review the proposal.

 “ Preliminary short plat ” means a neat and approximate scale drawing of a proposed  short subdivision , showing the existing conditions and the proposed layout of streets,  lots ,  blocks , encumbrances, encroachments, and other information needed to properly review the proposal.

 “ Principal use ” means the use for which the majority of a  lot ,  structure , or  building  is designed or actually employed.

 “ Produce stand ” means a type of temporary use as defined in AMC  19.48.020(B) .

 “ Professional office ” means a type of commercial use category as defined in AMC  19.44.040 .

 “ Project permit ” or “ project permit application ” means any land use or environmental permit or license required from the  city  for a project action, including but not limited to  building  permits,  subdivisions ,  binding site plans ,  conditional uses , shoreline substantial  development permits ,  site plan  review, permits or approvals required by critical area ordinances, site-specific  rezones  authorized by a  comprehensive plan  or subarea plan, but excluding the adoption or amendment of a  comprehensive plan , subarea plan, or  development  regulations except as otherwise specifically included in this definition.

 “ Projecting sign ” means a type of  building -mounted  sign  as defined in AMC  19.67.030 .

 “ Public access ” means access for all  persons  at all times.

 “ Public park ” means a type of parks,  open space , and natural areas land use as defined by AMC  19.46.030(B) .

 “ Public safety facility ” means a type of general-service use as defined in AMC  19.44.020(E) .

 “ Public street ” means a public thoroughfare which provides the principal means of access to abutting properties. See AMC Chapter  19.52 ,  Public Street  Design, for related  public street  design standards and roadway functional classifications.

   Q.   Q Definitions.

 “ Qualified professional ” means a  person  with experience and training in the applicable field or critical area. A  qualified professional  must have obtained a B.S. or B.A. or equivalent degree in biology, engineering, environmental studies, fisheries, geology or related field, and have two years of related work experience.

   R.   R Definitions.

 “ Rain garden ” means a nonengineered shallow,  landscaped  depression, with compost-amended native soils and adapted plants. The depression is designed to  pond  and temporarily store  stormwater  runoff from adjacent areas, and to allow  stormwater  to pass through the amended soil profile. See AMC  19.65.060(F)  for  rain garden  design standards.

 “ Real estate signs ” means a type of  sign  as defined in AMC  19.67.030 .

 “ Receiving waters ” means bodies of water or  surface water  systems to which surface runoff is discharged via a point source of  stormwater  or via sheet flow.  Groundwater  to which surface runoff is directed by infiltration.

 “ Recreational vehicle ” means a type of temporary use as defined in AMC  19.48.020(D) .

 “ Religious institution ” means any  building  used for nonprofit purposes by an established religious organization holding either tax exempt status under Section  501(c)(3)  of the Internal Revenue Code or under the state property tax law, where such  building  is primarily intended to be used as a place of worship. The term includes, but is not necessarily limited to, church, temple, synagogue, and mosque.

 “ Research and development ” means a type of use category as defined in AMC  19.45.040 .

 “ Retail ” means a type of use category as defined in AMC  19.44.120(A) .

 “ Retaining wall ” means a  structure  that retains (holds back) any material (usually earth) and prevents it from sliding or eroding away.

 “ Review time period ” means the time period set by AMC  19.20.030  for review of an application for a  development permit , as applied by AMC  19.20.160 .

 “ Rezone ” means an amendment which changes the use classifications and/or boundaries upon the official zoning map.

 “ Right-of-way ” means a strip of land in public ownership used for transportation, utility,  open space , or other public purposes.

 “ Rockery ” means placed rocks used to control soil erosion.

 “ Roofline ” means the highest edge of the roof or the top of a parapet, whichever establishes the top line of the  structure  when viewed in a horizontal plane.

   S.   S Definitions.

 “ School ” means a type of civic use as defined in AMC  19.46.020(C) .

 “ Second floor ” means the habitable  floor  above the  ground floor .

 “ Sediment basin  ( pond )” means a temporary sediment  pond  installed at a construction site.

 “ Setback ” means the  minimum required  distance between a property line and a line parallel to that property line. Types of  setbacks  include:

        1.   Street  setback .

        2.   Street  setback — garage .

        3.   Side street  setback .

        4.   Interior side  setback .

        5.   Interior side  setback — second floor .

        6.   Rear  setback .

 Figure 19.12.020(S) shows the location of some  setback  types on a typical  lot . See AMC  19.42.130  for clarification on how all  setback  types are measured.

   Figure 19.12.020(S)
 Setback types.

 “ Setback line ” means a line designating the minimum  setback  from the property line. See AMC  19.42.130  for measurement clarifications.

 “ Shell building ” means a nonresidential  building  that is capable of being divided into multiple leasable  units  or spaces with different uses but has had no use or uses identified as part of a land use permit application.

 “ Shoreline permit ” means a shoreline substantial  development permit , shoreline  conditional use  permit, or shoreline  variance  issued pursuant to the  city ’s Shoreline Master Program.

 “ Short plat ” means the  plat  of a  short subdivision .

 “ Short subdivision ” means the division or redivision of land into nine or fewer  lots .

  Sign . See AMC  19.67.030  for  sign  and  sign -related definitions.

 “ Significant tree ” means a deciduous or evergreen  tree  greater than six inches in diameter at five feet above  grade .

 “ Single-family dwelling ” refers to a type of  household  living use as defined in AMC  19.43.010(B) .

 “ Single-family—small lot dwelling ” refers to a type of  household  living use as defined in AMC  19.43.030 .

 “ Site area ” means the total horizontal area within the property lines excluding external streets, except where property lines extend waterward of the ordinary high water mark (OHWM), in which case the  site area  is the total horizontal area landward of the OHWM and excluding external streets.

 “ Site plan ” means a map or representation of a site showing thereon the location of various features of a particular proposal, such as  setbacks ,  buildings , parking areas, and other items.

 “ Source control BMP ” means a  structure  or operation intended to prevent pollutants from coming into contact with  stormwater  through physical separation of areas or careful management of activities that are sources of pollutants.

 “ Standard of review ” means the amount of deference given by an  appellate body  in reviewing a  decision  of a lower  decision-maker .

 “ Storefront ” means the  ground floor   facade  of a commercial use adjacent to a sidewalk or internal pathway.

 “ Storefront block frontage ” refers to a type of  block frontage  designation that emphasizes  storefronts . See AMC  19.61.060  for details.

 “ Stormwater ” means that portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate into the ground or evaporate, but flows via overland flow, interflow, pipes and other features of a  stormwater  drainage system into a defined surface waterbody, or a constructed infiltration facility.

 “ Stormwater facility ” means a constructed component of a  stormwater  drainage system, designed or constructed to perform a particular function or multiple functions.  Stormwater facilities  include, but are not limited to, pipes, swales, ditches, culverts,  street gutters , detention  ponds , retention  ponds , constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catch basins, oil/water separators, and biofiltration swales.

 “ Stormwater management manual ” means the  city ’s manual for design of  stormwater facilities , as adopted in AMC  19.76.040 .

 “ Story ” means that portion of a  building  included between the upper surface of a  floor  and the upper surface of the  floor  or roof next above. It is measured as the vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost  story , from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.

 “ Street gutter ” means a low area at the side of a road used to catch water and carry it away from the road.

 “ Streetscape ” means the space between the  buildings  on either side of a street that defines its character. The elements of a  streetscape  include  block frontages ,  building   facades ,  landscaping  ( trees , yards, bushes, plantings, etc.), sidewalks, street paving, street furniture (benches, kiosks, trash receptacles, fountains, etc.),  signs , awnings, and street lighting.

 “ Structural source control BMP ” means a physical, structural, or mechanical device or facility that is intended to prevent pollutants from entering  stormwater .

 “ Structure ” means that which is built or constructed. An edifice or  building  of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed together in some definite manner, not to include  fences  less than seven feet high, paved areas, or  retaining walls .

 “ Subdivision ” means the division or redivision of land as regulated by AMC Chapter  19.32 , Land Divisions.

 “ Substandard lot ” means a  lot  that does not meet current  city  standards for area, width, or other dimensional characteristics for the zone in which it is located.

 “ Supportive housing ” refers to a type of supportive living use as defined in AMC  19.43.160 .

 “ Surface water ” means waters that flow over the land surface and frequently interact with  groundwater .

   T.   T Definitions.

 “ Temporary signs ” means conforming  signs  permitted for a specified period of time. See AMC  19.67.110  for applicable standards.

 “ Tent structure ” means any  structure  which is designed to be freestanding or partially supported by another  structure , is covered with metal, canvas, plastic, or other material of a generally temporary nature, supported by a wood or pipe or similar skeletal frame.

 “ Townhouse dwelling ” refers to a type of  household  living use as defined in AMC  19.43.070 .

 “ Tract ” means land reserved for special uses such as  open space ,  surface water  retention, utilities, or access.  Tracts  are not counted as  lots  or considered as  building sites .

 “ Transparency ” means the degree to which rays of light may transmit through a substance. For  storefronts  and other ground level nonresidential uses,  transparency  also refers to the ability to see through the window and into the  building  as clarified in AMC  19.61.050 .

 “ Treatment BMP ” means a  best management practice  that is intended to remove pollutants from  stormwater .

 “ Tree ” means any living woody plant characterized by one main stem or trunk (or a group of trunks, in some species) and many branches, and having a diameter of eight inches or more measured at 24 inches above ground level when mature.

 “ Triplex dwelling ” refers to a type of  household  living use as defined in AMC  19.43.060 .

   U.   U Definitions.

 “ Under-canopy signs ” means a type of  building -mounted  sign  as defined in AMC  19.67.030 .

 “ Undesignated block frontage ” refers to a type of  block frontage  without a designation. See AMC  19.61.110  for details.

 “ Undeveloped lot ” means a  lot  or parcel of land upon which no  building  or  structure  exists.

  Unit . See “ Dwelling unit .”

 “ Unit lot subdivision ” means a  subdivision  of land within a parent parcel that creates individual sellable  lots . See AMC  19.32.050(D)  for  unit lot subdivision  procedures.

   V.   V Definitions.

 “ Variance ” means an adjustment from a dimensional or numeric standard of this title issued per AMC Chapter  19.38 ,  Variances .

 “ Vertical building modulation ” means stepping back or projecting forward vertical  walls  of a  building  face, within specified intervals of  building  width and depth, as a means of breaking up the apparent bulk of a  structure ’s continuous exterior  walls .  Vertical building modulation  may be used to meet the  facade   articulation  standards in AMC  19.63.040 .

 “ Vesting ” means the legal establishment of a right which cannot be revoked by subsequent conditions or changes in law without due process of law. Refer to AMC  19.20.070  for  vesting  standards.

   W.   W Definitions.

 “ Wall ” means an upright  structure  of wood, stone, brick or other such material serving to enclose, divide, support or protect.

 “ Wall sign ” means a type of  building -mounted  sign  as defined in AMC  19.67.030 .

 “ Water-oriented industrial uses ” means a type of use category as defined in AMC  19.45.080(A) .

 “ Weather protection ” means a permanent horizontal  structure  above pedestrian areas such as sidewalks and  building  entries that protects pedestrians from inclement weather.

 “ Window sign ” means a type of  building -mounted  sign  as defined in AMC  19.67.030 .  (Ord. 4092 § 2 (Exh. A), 2026; Ord. 5014 § 2 (Att. A), 2025; Ord. 4023 § 1 (Att. A), 2022; Ord. 4022 § 1 (Att. A), 2022; Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019; Ord. 2992 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 2794 § 1 (Att. A), 2008; Ord. 2316, 1994)

    19.12.040   Rules of interpretation.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Within this title, all words used have their normal and customary meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in this title.

      1.   Words used in the present tense include the future.

      2.   The plural includes the singular and vice versa.

    B.   Distances are measured horizontally unless otherwise specified.

    C.   Interpretations of this code must be consistent with the  comprehensive plan .

    D.   Interpretations related to uses in each zone should be based on the “purpose” section of each zone.

    E.   Where two applicable rules conflict within this title, the most restrictive rule controls unless otherwise specified.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019; Ord. 2992 § 1 (Att. A), 2016)

    19.12.060   Supremacy.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

 In the event of a conflict between provisions of this title and AMC Title  13 ,  16 , or  17  the provisions of this title control. In the event of a conflict between provisions of this title and AMC Chapter  18.16 , Shoreline Master Plan, the provisions of AMC Chapter  18.16 , Shoreline Master Plan, control.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019; Ord. 2992 § 1 (Att. A), 2016)

    19.12.080   Administrative interpretation.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Consistent with RCW  36.70B.110(11) , any  person  may submit a written request for an interpretation of this title. Any such request must:

      1.   Specify each code section for which an interpretation is requested.

      2.   Describe why an interpretation of each section is necessary.

      3.   Include any reasons or material in support of a proposed interpretation.

      4.   Include any fee established by the  City Council  for such requests.

    B.   If the interpretation request is associated with a pending application for a  development permit , the  Director  may consolidate the request with the process for review of the application. If the  Director  does not consolidate the request with an application, the  Director  must issue an interpretation within 60  days  of receipt of the request and publish it to the  city  website.

    C.   In making an interpretation, the  Director  must consider all of the following:

      1.   The applicable provisions of the code, including their purpose and context.

      2.   The applicable provisions of the  comprehensive plan  and other relevant codes and policies.

      3.   The impact of the interpretation on other provisions of the AMC.

      4.   The implications of the interpretation for  development  within the  city  as a whole.

    D.   The  Director  may respond to inquiries regarding the applicability and interpretation of various code provisions prior to or outside the context of a formal request for an administrative interpretation.

    E.   An administrative interpretation is not binding on the  Director  or  city , or appealable, but the  decision-maker  on a relevant  development permit  application may treat an interpretation as persuasive authority.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019; Ord. 2992 § 1 (Att. A), 2016)

	Your Selections

	 What’s Nearby

			 Title

					   18

					 19

					 20

			 Division

					 1

					 2

			 Chapter

					   19.10

					 19.12

					 19.14

		On This Page

				19.12.020 Definitions

				19.12.040 Rules of interpretation

				19.12.060 Supremacy

				19.12.080 Administrative interpretation

  The Anacortes Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 5028, passed May 4, 2026.

 Disclaimer: The city attorney’s office has the official version of the Anacortes Municipal Code. Users should contact the city attorney’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited here.

				 City Website: www.anacorteswa.gov
				 City Telephone: (360) 293-1900

	  Hosted by General Code.

			 Privacy Policy
			|
			 Terms of Use
			|
			 Cookie Preferences

				 Contents

					 ×

					 All Publications

					Municipal Code

					Municipal Policies

			   Your Selections

					Anacortes Municipal Code

					Anacortes Municipal Policies

		   Expand All

		   Collapse All

		   Share

		   Clear

					   Close

		 View Full Table

		 View Full Image

		 View Full File

		  ×

			    Go to Top

			    Go to Bottom

			    Share/Save

			 Close

				Save, Share, Bookmark or Print

				History of This Subsection