Chapter 14.78 STANDARDS FOR CaRD LAND DIVISIONS

         Chapter 14.78
STANDARDS FOR CaRD LAND DIVISIONS

             Sections:

              14.78.010    Purpose.

              14.78.020    Applicability.

              14.78.030    What is a CaRD?

              14.78.040    Where is a CaRD allowed?

              14.78.050    Density and open space limits.

              14.78.060    Design requirements.

              14.78.070    Lot size requirements.

              14.78.080    Setbacks.

              14.78.090    Open space requirements.

              14.78.100    Open space types.

        14.78.010  Purpose.

             The purpose of this Chapter and a  CaRD  land division is:

             (1)    To  buffer  and protect  natural resource lands ;

             (2)    To reserve lands that may be appropriate for future  urban growth areas ;

             (3)    To help retain the rural landscape, character, and lifestyle;

             (4)    To protect  critical areas  by transferring development potential from the critical area portion of a site to a non-critical area portion of a site;

             (5)    To create development patterns that provide for greater efficiency and flexibility for current and future land use; housing diversity; natural resource land and critical area conservation and protection; retention of  open space ; and provide incentives for utilizing  CaRD  land divisions; and

             (6)    To ensure the continued existence of  open space  as an element of Skagit County’s  rural character . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.78.020  Applicability.

             This Chapter applies to  applications  for short or  long subdivisions  that opt to use the  CaRD  design standards. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.78.030  What is a CaRD?

             (1)    A  conservation and reserve development  (CaRD)  land division  is a method of single-family residential land development characterized by  building lots  or envelopes that are much smaller than otherwise allowed in the  zone , resulting in:

             (a)     Open space  for  agriculture  or  forestry ;

             (b)    Continuity of ecological functions characteristic of the property;

             (c)    Preservation of  rural character ;

             (d)    Reduced  impervious surface  area; and

             (e)    Lowered costs of development and maintenance.

             (2)     CaRD  land divisions follow the requirements of this Section when in conflict with the requirements of the underlying  zone . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.78.040  Where is a CaRD allowed?

             A  CaRD  land division is permitted only in the following zones:

             (1)    Agriculture-NRL;

             (2)    Industrial Forest-NRL;

             (3)    Secondary Forest-NRL;

             (4)    Rural Resource-NRL;

             (5)    Rural Intermediate;

             (6)    Rural Reserve;

             (7)     Rural Village  Residential; and

             (8)    Hamilton Urban Reserve. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.78.050  Density and open space limits.

             (1)    The table below establishes, for each zone:

             (a)    The minimum amount of contiguous acreage within a  zone  that permits a  CaRD  in that  zone ;

             (b)    The maximum gross residential density for a  CaRD ;

             (c)    The maximum number of  dwelling units  per cluster pod in a long  CaRD ;

             (d)    The types of  open space  allowed for a  CaRD .

                      Table 14.78.050-1  CaRD  Density and  Open Space  Limits

                          Zone

                         Minimum Size for a  CaRD

                         Maximum Residential Density

                         Maximum Units per Cluster Pod

                         Allowed Types of  Open Space

                         Ag-NRL

                         80 ac

                         1 du per 40 ac

                         6

                         Os-PA, Os-NRL, Os-RSV

                         IF-NRL

                         160 ac

                         1 du per 80 ac

                         6

                         Os-PA, Os-NRL, Os-RSV

                         SF-NRL

                         40 ac

                         1 du per 20 ac

                         6

                         Os-PA, Os-NRL, Os-RSV

                         RRc-NRL

                         20 ac

                         1 du per 10 ac

                         14

                         Os-PA, Os-NRL, Os-RSV

                         RI

                         5 ac

                         1 du per 2.5 ac

                         14

                         All

                         RRv

                         10 ac

                         1 du per 5 ac

                         14

                         All

                         RVR

                         5 ac

                         1 du per 2.5 ac

                         14

                         All

                         RVR—Public Water

                         2 ac

                         1 du per 1 ac

                         14

                         All

                         H-URv

                         20 ac

                         1 du per 10 ac

                         14

                         Os-PA, Os-UR, Os-RO, Os-RSV

             (2)    Exceptions and Limitations.

             (a)    Where the density ratio results in a fraction of a  dwelling unit , the permitted number of  dwelling units  must be rounded down to the nearest whole number.

             (b)    In the RVR  zone , where  public water service  is provided to the  CaRD , the minimum size is two acres and the maximum residential density is one  dwelling unit  per one acre. Where public water is not available, the minimum  lot  size is five acres and the maximum residential density is one  dwelling unit  per 2.5 acres.

             (c)    In areas designated as having a “ sole-source aquifer ,” e.g., Guemes Island, there is no density bonus for  CaRD  developments above the density limits in the underlying  zone  unless the source of water is from a public water system whose source is outside the  sole-source aquifer  area or from an approved alternative water system pursuant to SCC Chapter  12.48 .  Applications  for  CaRDs  requesting an alternative system to obtain a density bonus is processed as a Type 3 review per SCC  14.06.150 . Hearing Examiner criteria for review of an alternative system must ensure that the system has no adverse impacts to the  sole-source aquifer .

             (d)    In the Samish River Basin, the  CaRD  density bonus is limited as provided in SCC  14.24.340 (3)(c).

             (e)    Where a proposed  CaRD  includes two or more  zones , development rights may not be moved from a higher density  zone  to a lower density  zone .

             (f)    Maximum residential densities for lands in or within one-quarter mile of a designated  Mineral  Resource Overlay (MRO) shall be no greater than one  dwelling unit  per 10 acres; provided, that if the underlying land use designation density of land within one-quarter mile of MRO lands is greater than one  dwelling unit  per 10 acres, the development rights associated with that density may be transferred to and clustered on that portion of the property located outside of one-quarter mile for the MRO lands, consistent with the  CaRD  policies in the  Comprehensive Plan . (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.78.060  Design requirements.

             (1)    General  Lot  Location and Orientation.

             (a)     Building lots  may not be located in  critical areas  and their  buffers  designated pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.24 .

             (b)    In the Airport Environs Overlay,  building lots  may not be located within Airport Compatibility  Zone  2.

             (c)    In a  CaRD  within or adjacent to an NRL designation,  lots  must be located to:

             (i)    Minimize potential impacts to natural resource land production on both the  subject property  and any adjacent resource lands;

             (ii)    Not complicate resource access or normal field operations or harvesting; and

             (iii)    Minimize the impact of resource land operations on the  residential lot  (such as airborne dust, noise, and smell).

             (d)    On land zoned RRc-NRL that is subject to the ongoing agricultural rules in SCC  14.24.120 , any  property owner  who applies for and receives  CaRD  approval must, at the time of  CaRD  approval, automatically be subject to the  buffer  requirements of SCC  14.24.530  and no longer subject to the provisions of SCC  14.24.120 .

             (2)    Short  CaRDs .

             (a)     Lots  must be located to minimize infrastructure requirements such as roadways,  driveways , utilities, etc., to the greatest extent possible.

             (b)    New  building lots  within short  CaRDs  must share infrastructure either with other new  building lots  or with existing uses on the property.

             (c)    In order to achieve a reduction of necessary infrastructure, short  CaRDs  are required to meet one of the following provisions:

             (i)    Where the  subject property  abuts an existing public  road , all new  building lots  must be clustered and the cluster must adjoin the  road  right-of-way; or

             (ii)    Where an existing residence is located either on the subject or an adjacent property, all new  building lots  must be clustered and the cluster must adjoin the  building  envelope of the existing residence.

             (d)    As an alternative to Subsection (2)(c) of this Section, for divisions resulting in more than one new  building lot ,  lots  may be located elsewhere within the  CaRD  as long as all  lots  proposed for new construction are clustered together, except where prohibited by Subsection (1)(a) of this Section.

             (e)    Alternatives to Subsections (2)(c) and (2)(d) of this Section may be waived if the short  CaRD  is processed subject to a Type 3 review per SCC  14.06.150  and the Hearing Examiner determines that the purposes of SCC  14.78.010  can be met and the required  right-of-way  or easement area for any access  roads  to serve the  building  lots/envelopes must then be taken out of the allowable area for the  building  lots/envelopes.

             (3)    Long  CaRDs .

             (a)    Clustering of  Lots  Required. Except as described below, clustering of  lots  within the  CaRD  into cluster pods is required.

             (b)    The number of  dwelling units  in each cluster pod may not exceed the number specified in Table 14.78.050-1. The size of septic fields (both community and individual) or community water systems may further limit the size of cluster pods within a development, if such limitation is necessary to meet septic or water system requirements.

             (c)    A  lot  containing an existing house need not be included within a cluster, unless this is necessary to meet the other  CaRD  design requirements.

             (d)    Clustering of  lots  into cluster pods may not be required in the following limited circumstances:

             (i)    Special conditions and circumstances exist which are not the result of actions or omissions by the  applicant ;

             (ii)    Impacts on resource lands or  critical areas  make clustering inappropriate, or topographic or critical area constraints make clustering infeasible; and

             (iii)    Separate access points to the adjacent  road , if necessary, are acceptable to the County Engineer.

             (e)    If clustering into cluster pods is not required, additional conditions may be applied and the  lot  size requirements continue to apply.

             (f)     Setbacks . Cluster pods must be located a minimum of 25 feet from each other and from existing public  roads .

             (g)    Screening. Except in Ag-NRL, cluster pods must be screened from existing adjacent public  roads  and from other cluster pods either by:

             (i)    Existing topography and vegetation; or

             (ii)    An approved landscaping plan pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.25 .

             (4)    For the purpose of this Section:

             (a)    “Cluster” means adjoining.

             (b)    “Cluster pod” means a number of residential  CaRD lots  adjoining each other and grouped together in a single location on a parcel. The number of  lots  allowed in any cluster pod is limited in Table 14.78.050-1. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.78.070  Lot size requirements.

             (1)    Minimum. The minimum  lot  size is 5,000 square feet.

             (2)    Maximum. The maximum  lot  size for buildable  lots  is one acre, unless a larger  lot  is needed for one or more of the following reasons, in which case that  lot  may be no larger than necessary to accomplish the purpose of the exception and the exception must be recorded on the face of the plat map:

             (a)    To satisfy individual water system supply (SCC Chapter  12.48 ) or on-site sewage system requirements (SCC Chapter  12.05 ), or both;

             (b)    To contain both an existing residential  building  and existing accessory building(s); or

             (c)    To contain both an existing residential  building  and proposed  buildings  accessory to a natural resource land  open space  designation.

             (3)    Maximum Exception for  Open Space . In addition to the exceptions discussed under Subsection (2) of this Section, one  lot  within each  CaRD  may be greater than one acre, for the sole purpose of containing  open space . In such a parcel, only one acre may be used for a residential  dwelling unit  and residential accessory  buildings , unless a larger  building  area is allowed based on the criteria under Subsection (2) of this Section, with the remainder of the parcel placed in a  open space  designation.

             (4)    Alternative Average  Lot  Size Maximum. As an alternative to Subsection (2) of this Section,  lots  may be as large as one and one-half acres if the average size of all  lots  within the  CaRD  (except a  lot  containing  open space ) does not exceed one acre. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.78.080  Setbacks.

             (1)     Setbacks  consistent with the underlying zoning are required from the exterior boundaries of the  CaRD  development, except as provided in this Section.

             (2)    All  buildings  within the  CaRD  land division must observe the following setbacks:

             (a)    A minimum of 20 feet from a public  road . In the Ag-NRL, IF-NRL, and SF-NRL  zones ,  lots  must be configured so that houses are no more than 200 feet from adjacent public  roads .

             (b)    A minimum of 200 feet from adjacent NRL designated parcels. Where the  building lots  are separated from the adjacent NRL parcel by a public  road , the width of the  road  right-of-way can be included in the 200-foot  setback  calculation.

             (c)    Fire separation as required by the applicable  building  code.

             (3)    Internal  setbacks  may be established by private covenant. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.78.090  Open space requirements.

             (1)    Requirement. All land within a  CaRD  must be in an  open space  designation in accordance with this Section except for the following:

             (a)     Building lots  (i.e.,  lots  which do not contain  open space ); or

             (b)    The  development envelope  of a  lot  containing  open space .

             (2)    Designation of  Open Space .  Open space  must be designated as one or more of the  open space  types in SCC  14.78.100  as allowed for the underlying  zone  by Table 14.78.050-1. Applicable  open space  designations must be maintained through restriction in a note on the final plat.

             (3)    Location.  Open space  must be located in either:

             (a)    A single contiguous separate tract within the  CaRD , retained in its entirety for  open space ; or

             (b)    A single dedicated  open space  area on one of the  lots  in the  CaRD , which must have a designated  building  envelope, where a house and accessory  structures  may be located, that is no larger than the maximum  lot  size allowed by SCC  14.78.070 .

             (4)    Uses Allowed in  Open Space . The uses specified in SCC  14.78.100  are allowed in each type of  open space , along with  structures  that are accessory to the primary use of each  open space  type if allowed by the underlying zoning.

             (5)    Guemes Island. On Guemes Island,  open space  tracts other than Os-RSV must be permanently protected by a  conservation easement  that prohibits future residences or  residential accessory uses  within the  open space  tract or area. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.78.100  Open space types.

             This Section describes the types of  open space  that may be utilized in a  CaRD  pursuant to Table 14.78.050-1 and SCC  14.78.090 .

             (1)     Open Space —Protection Areas (Os-PA).

             (a)    The purpose of this  open space  is to protect  critical areas  (without the expense of a detailed  site assessment ),  historic sites , and view sheds.

             (b)    All land that has not received a  site assessment  pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.24  must be placed in this category.

             (c)    If a critical area  site assessment  is performed in the future and the  critical areas  are delineated, the Os-PA area may be changed through a plat alteration to another  open space  designation based on the criteria set forth in this Section with the  critical areas  identified as  protected critical areas  (PCAs). A recorded easement is required. A revised plat map for this purpose will not be considered a plat amendment.

             (d)    Nonresidential  historic sites  and their landscape setting must also be placed in this category.  Historic sites  used as residences may be located inside or outside of this  open space .

             (e)    All  open space  designated Os-PA must be preserved pursuant to SCC  14.24.080  and  14.24.090  until such time as a different  open space  designation is requested and SCC Chapter 14.24 is satisfied. Uses and preservation of the Os-PA occur as follows:

             (i)     Critical Areas . Follow the parameters set forth in SCC Chapter  14.24  for conservation and maintenance.

             (ii)     Historic Sites . A use covenant with covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) must be determined through the  CaRD  review process and noted on the face of the plat. The duration of the covenant must be noted on the plat.

             (2)     Open Space —Natural Resource Lands (Os-NRL).

             (a)    The purpose of this  open space  is to preserve the  natural resource lands  within the County by clustering development and leaving the remainder open for resource production.

             (b)    The  open space  within  CaRDs  zoned Ag-NRL, IF-NRL, SF-NRL, or RRc-NRL must be placed in this category, unless designated Os-PA, subject to the provisions of SCC Chapter  14.24 , the  Critical Areas  Ordinance.

             (c)    All  open space  designated Os-NRL must be placed in a  natural resource lands  easement (NRLE) that restricts the grantor and its heirs, successors, and assigns from exercising rights to use and subdivide the land for any and all residential, recreational, commercial, and industrial purposes and activities that are not incidental to the purpose of the NRLE until such time that the land no longer has  long-term commercial significance  for the production of food,  agriculture  products,  timber  or extraction of  minerals . The property is restricted to natural resource production as defined in the NRLE and it may be used for those uses outlined in the underlying  zone  (except for a  dwelling unit ). In the case of  Agriculture  and Industrial  Forest lands , restrictions defined in the NRLE may only be extinguished upon a finding by a court of competent jurisdiction that it is no longer possible to commercially use the property for the production of food,  agriculture  products,  timber , or extraction of  minerals .

             (3)     Open Space —Urban Reserve (Os-UR).

             (a)    The purpose of this  open space  is to retain areas of  open space  until such time that urban development is deemed appropriate for that area and then to continue to require a portion of that original space to be preserved.

             (b)    This  open space  may only be used within  CaRDs  on lands zoned  Rural Village  Residential, Rural Intermediate, or Rural Reserve, and only if these areas are located on a parcel of which 50 percent or greater is located within one-quarter mile of  urban growth areas  or  Rural Villages  excluding those areas subject to Os-PA or Os-NRL, and excluding Fidalgo Island until such time that a subarea plan which allows for this option has been completed in conjunction with any relevant amendments to the  Comprehensive Plan  for purposes of consistency. This  open space  designation if supported by a 20-year needs analysis may also be applied to areas located outside one-quarter mile of a UGA following the appropriate  Comprehensive Plan  and  development regulation  amendments.

             (c)    The requirements for Os-UR are:

             (i)    Future Urban Development Allowed. When land with an Os-UR designation goes into an  urban growth area  or a  Rural Village  Residential, additional development is allowed on the Os-UR designated land, except within a minimum of 30 percent of the parent parcel which is to remain in  open space  through a plat restriction unless and until the parcel is annexed into a  city  or town. That land which is not designated as  open space  in a plat restriction then becomes available for urban development pursuant to the underlying urban zoning designation. Amendments to the plat map and recorded easements are required with the agreement. A revised plat map for this purpose will not be considered a plat amendment.

             (ii)     Open Space  Urban Reserve Land Uses. All  open space  designated Os-UR may have the same uses as allowed in Os-RA. That Os-UR land converted to permanent  open space  by agreement of the owner and County may be used for any recreational use outlined in the underlying zoning or special uses relating to recreation, so long as a special permit is obtained, and for greenbelts or  trails .

             (4)     Open Space —Rural Open (Os-RO).

             (a)    The purpose of this  open space  is to provide areas within the rural portions of the County without having to commit to a specific recreational use. It is intended for  open space  purposes and/or greenbelts.

             (b)    This  open space  may only be used in  CaRDs  with the following designations:  Rural Village  Residential, Rural Intermediate and Rural Reserve, excluding Fidalgo Island until such time that a subarea plan which allows for this option has been completed in conjunction with any relevant amendments to the  Comprehensive Plan  for purposes of consistency.

             (c)    All  open space  placed in this designation must remain in Os-RO unless the County has adopted a  Comprehensive Plan amendment  and implementing regulation resulting from the completion of a Countywide comprehensive needs analysis for future development, in which case the Os-RO  open space  may be redesignated to Os-UR upon  application  to the County. Such  application  requires amendments to the plat map and recorded easements. A revised plat map for this purpose will not be considered a plat amendment.

             (d)    The requirements for Os-RO are:

             (i)    All  open space  designated Os-RO may have the same uses as allowed in Os-RA.

             (5)     Open Space —Recreational/Amenities (Os-RA).

             (a)    The purpose of this  open space  is to provide areas for recreational purposes, either solely by owners within the  CaRD  land division or by the general public or a combination thereof.

             (b)    The  open space  within  CaRDs  on lands zoned  Rural Village  Residential, Rural Intermediate, and Rural Reserve and which is intended for recreation purposes, community facilities, and/or greenbelts must be placed in this category.

             (c)    The requirements for Os-RA are:

             (i)    All  open space  designated Os-RA may be used for hobby  farms , greenbelts and  trails  or any recreational use outlined in the underlying zoning or special uses relating to recreation, so long as a special use permit is obtained. The applicable  open space  designation must be maintained through a plat restriction. An Os-RA may be redesignated to another  open space  designation only if all  property owners  within the  CaRD  division agree to the redesignation and if it meets the appropriate criteria for the  open space  designation and it meets the underlying zoning criteria. Amendments to the plat map and recorded easements must be required. A revised plat map for this purpose will not be considered a plat amendment.

             (6)     Open Space —Reserve (Os-RSV).

             (a)    The purpose of this  open space  is to reserve land for future development of development rights that have not been utilized in the remainder of the  CaRD , otherwise permitted under the zoning designation.

             (b)     Open space  designated Os-RSV may have the same uses as allowed in Os-RA.

             (c)    The applicable  open space  designation, which must be maintained through a plat restriction, must continue until the  open space  area is further platted through a  CaRD  process; provided, that any resulting  land division  shall not exceed the allowable development rights of the original parcel.

             (i)    On Guemes Island, if the  applicant  wishes to retain and not utilize all of the development rights for the parcel, they must place any of the remaining development rights into the Os-RSV designation.

             (ii)    On Guemes Island, the amount of land placed into the  Open Space —Reserve may not exceed the number of future  lots  times one acre, and no portion of the Os-RSV area may contain  critical areas .

             (d)    Preservation of Development Rights in NRL Areas. If a parcel is within a natural resource land (NRL) and the  applicant  wishes not to exhaust all of the development rights for the parcel, they may place any of the remainder developmental rights into an Os-RSV designation to be divided at a later date. The number of future  lots  available is only those remaining development rights not used after the parent parcel has been divided. Where this occurs, the following criteria must be met:

             (i)    Ninety percent of the overall  open space  area of the original project must be placed in Os-NRL;

             (ii)    The amount of land placed into the  Open Space —Reserve must not exceed the number of future  lots  times one acre;

             (iii)    No additional  open space  will be required;

             (iv)    A development plan showing all areas of future development and access points for future divisions must be provided; and

             (v)    No portion of the reserved Os-RSV area may contain  critical areas . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))