Chapter 14.74 LAND DIVISIONS

         Chapter 14.74
LAND DIVISIONS

             Sections:

              14.74.010    Purpose.

              14.74.020    Applicability.

              14.74.030    Types of land divisions.

              14.74.040    Eligibility for division.

              14.74.050    General requirements.

              14.74.090    Violations.

              14.74.100    Preliminary approval—Application requirements.

              14.74.110    Preliminary approval—Review criteria.

              14.74.120    Preliminary approval—Revisions.

              14.74.130    Preliminary approval—Duration of validity.

              14.74.140    Construction plan approval.

              14.74.200    Final approval—Application requirements.

              14.74.210    Final approval—Review criteria.

              14.74.220    Final approval—Recording.

              14.74.300    Alterations.

              14.74.400    Vacations.

        14.74.010  Purpose.

             The intent of this Chapter is to carry out the policies of the  Comprehensive Plan , the Countywide Planning Policies, and the laws of the State of Washington relating to  land division . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.020  Applicability.

             (1)    This Chapter applies to all divisions and  redivisions  of land for the purposes of sale, lease, or transfer.

             (2)    This Chapter applies to all types of  land divisions , including  CaRDs  and  binding site plans .

             (3)    Exceptions. Consistent with RCW  58.17.040 , this Chapter does not apply to:

             (a)    Cemeteries and other burial plots while used for that purpose;

             (b)    Divisions made by testamentary provisions, or the laws of descent, except that use of the newly created parcels may be limited by SCC Chapter  14.70 ;

             (c)    Divisions of land into  lots  80 acres and greater (for purposes of computing the size under this exemption of any  lot  that borders on a  street  or  road , the  lot  size may be expanded to include that area which would be bounded by the centerline of the  road  or  street  and the side  lot  lines of the  lot  running perpendicular to such centerline);

             (d)    A division for the purpose of leasing land for facilities providing wireless facility services while used for that purpose;

             (e)    Any other exemption in RCW  58.17.040 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.030  Types of land divisions.

             (1)    All  land divisions  are accomplished via one of the following processes:

             (a)    A  short subdivision  (for division into four or fewer  lots );

             (b)    A  long subdivision  (for division into five or more  lots ); or

             (c)    A  binding site plan  (for division into any number of commercial/industrial  lots ).

             (2)    Each short or  long subdivision  is one of the following:

             (a)    A standard  land division ;

             (b)    A one-acre segregation for agricultural land preservation per SCC  14.76.200 ;

             (c)    A one-acre-lot Urban Reserve Residential (URR)  land division  per SCC  14.76.300 ; or

             (d)    A  unit lot subdivision , which may also be a portion of another  land division , per SCC  14.76.400 ; or

             (e)    A  conservation and reserve development  (CaRD)  land division  per SCC Chapter  14.78 .

             (3)    Each  land division  requires a two-stage approval process as described in this Chapter:

             (a)    Preliminary approval, whereby the layout of  lots  is approved;

             (b)    Final approval, whereby the installation of improvements and infrastructure is reviewed for consistency with preliminary approval, the  land division  is finalized, and  lots  are authorized for sale.

             (4)    Two or more contiguous  lots  in any common ownership may be divided through a  short subdivision  into a maximum of eight  lots . Five years must pass before another contiguous  short subdivision  in common ownership interest may be approved. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.040  Eligibility for division.

             (1)    Only a  legal lot  (as determined per SCC Chapter  14.70 ), or a combination of two or more contiguous  legal lots , may be divided.

             (2)    Only land within an official designated boundary of a Skagit County Fire Protection District may be divided, unless the division is to divide land for sale only and no development right is desired.

             (a)    In the Industrial Forest—NRL  zone , a parcel must have been within the boundaries of a fire district as of July 26, 2005, to be considered for development additional to that which is allowed pursuant to SCC  14.10.080 (2)(c). The one exception is for  land divisions  for residential purposes on certain saltwater islands, as further described and allowed under SCC  14.10.080 (2)(d).

             (b)    Prior to approval of any residential  land division  outside of a Skagit County Fire District, there must be a water supply to each  lot  that meets the minimum flow and pressure requirements for operation of a fire sprinkler system installed per National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 13D or such other fire protection system as approved by the Skagit County Fire Marshal.

             (3)    If any portion of a proposed  land division  is located within a flood control  zone  as provided in RCW Chapter  86.16 , written approval must be obtained from the State  Department  of  Ecology  per RCW  58.17.120 .

             (4)    If the  lot  to be divided was created through a prior  short subdivision , at least five years must have passed since the recording of such prior  short subdivision . Additional  short subdivisions  on the remainder of such lands are not eligible for approval for five years unless the total divisions are less than four on a single  legal lot  or less than eight on two or more  legal lots . In such instances, the total divisions may not total more than four or eight, respectively, during the five-year period. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.050  General requirements.

             (1)    Applicability.

             (a)    This Section applies to all types of  land divisions .

             (b)    In addition to all other applicable provisions of Skagit County Code, a  land division  must comply with the provisions of this Section and any applicable standards in SCC Chapters  14.76  through  14.79 .

             (2)    Minimum  Lot  Size. The  land division  must meet the size requirements in the underlying  zone  or the alternatives in SCC Chapters  14.76  through  14.79 , as applicable.

             (a)    For the purpose of determining the gross acreage of a proposed  land division , the acreage includes the area that would be bounded by the centerline of any existing public  road  or  street , that is adjacent to the  land division , and the side  lot  lines of the  lot  running perpendicular to such centerline.

             (b)    For the purposes of determining whether proposed  lots  within a proposed  land division  meet the minimum  lot  size of the  zone , the proposed  lot  acreage includes:

             (i)    The area that would be bounded by the centerline of any existing public  road  or  street  that is adjacent to the  lot  and the side  lot  lines of the  lot  running perpendicular to such centerline; and

             (ii)    The area that would be bounded by the centerline of any proposed public or  private road  or  street , which is adjacent to the  lot  and internal to the  land division , and the side  lot  lines of the  lot  running perpendicular to such centerline.

             (c)    For a public safety facility in certain  zones , the  Director  may reduce the minimum  lot  size required for a  land division  per SCC  14.10.100 .

             (3)    Access. Each  lot  within a  land division  must have approved access to a  street  conforming to County  road  standards, unless an alternative standard has been approved by the County Engineer in a pre-application meeting and documentation of such approval is submitted with the development  application . To ensure safe and adequate access, the County Engineer:

             (a)    May approve private  streets  if (i) the private  street  requirements contained in the County  road  standards as adopted in SCC Chapter  14.66  are met, and (ii) adequate provision is made for access to the private  street  by future  land divisions ;

             (b)    May limit direct access to certain  streets  and require on-site public or private  streets  in lieu of individual  driveways , in accordance with the County  road  standards;

             (c)    Must be satisfied that the  applicant  has demonstrated sufficient access right, and appropriate pro rata contributions for the entire access route, where access to the  land division  is gained via a  private road ;

             (d)    Must require off-site improvements to public or private  streets  needed to provide access from the  subdivision  to a  road  acceptable to the County Engineer; and

             (e)    Must ensure that the number of  lots  to be served by the  road  system complies with the  road  standards.

             (4)    If access is proposed off of a State highway, a State access permit must be obtained by the  applicant . The access permit must be approved prior to the start of construction of on-site improvements, or final plat, whichever is sooner.

             (5)    Safe Walking Conditions for School Children. In cases where a school is located within a quarter mile of a  long subdivision , where it is likely the children will walk to school, information regarding pedestrian needs generated by the project will be required and reviewed. Where deemed necessary, safe walkways between the  land division  and the school may be required.

             (6)    Public  Street  Rights-of-Way.  Dedication  or deeding to the County of  right-of-way  or a portion thereof for public  streets  is required within or along the boundaries of all  land divisions  or of any lot(s) within them where facts support that such  dedication  is reasonably necessary as a result of the impact created by the proposed development and where one or more of the following circumstances are met:

             (a)    The County’s transportation plan indicates the necessity of a new or additional  right-of-way  or portion thereof for  street  purposes;

             (b)    The  dedication  is necessary to extend or to complete the existing or future neighborhood  street  pattern to provide a public transportation system that supports future development of abutting property consistent with the Skagit County  Comprehensive Plan  or Skagit County Zoning Code;

             (c)    Where necessary to provide additions of  right-of-way  to existing County  right-of-way  to meet County  road  standards.

             (7)    Minimum  road  frontage of each  lot  must be 70 feet except when located on a cul-de-sac, then 40 feet. Individual  lots  may be accessed by a 20-foot  right-of-way . Panhandled  lots  may only be allowed if there is no other feasible access, as determined by the  Director  in a pre-application meeting and documentation is submitted with the development  application . Newly constructed contiguous or adjoining easements for access purposes are not permitted.

             (8)    Parkland and Facilities. The developer must either provide parkland and facilities within the  land division  in accordance with the standards in the Skagit County Comprehensive  Park  and Recreation Plan or pay a fee in lieu of required land or facilities or both.

             (9)     Open Space  Corridors.  Open space  easements must be provided by any  land division  when such divisions are located within any community or regional  open space  corridor identified by the Skagit County  Park  and Recreation Plan. The residents or  lot  owners of the development must be provided access to the  open space  easement. The area of the  open space  easement must be counted as part of the site for purposes of density and  floor area  calculations. Maintenance of the  open space  easement is the responsibility of the County.

             (10)    Evidence must be supplied from the applicable purveyor of the availability of water to serve the projects and adequate provision for sewage disposal. The method of sewage disposal must also be provided, including soil data, if individual sewage disposal is to be used, or if public sewer or  community septic  disposal is used, the name of the system. If individual wells are to be utilized, documentation approving the well sites must be provided, pursuant to SCC Chapter  12.48 . A  land division  within a seawater intrusion area (as defined in SCC  14.24.380 ) may not propose to use a well where chloride levels are 200 ppm or greater.

             (11)    Concurrency of services, per SCC Chapter  14.62 .

             (12)    A proposed  land division  that borders waters of the state may be required to provide public access to and along such waters pursuant to the County’s  Shoreline Master Program .

             (13)     Stormwater . Permanent  stormwater facilities  must be designed to accommodate all land and planned development within a  land division . The  Director  may require facilities to be designed for individual  lots  or groups of  lots  within the proposed  land division .

             (14)    For a  subdivision  of more than 10  lots , a public  transit stop  must be provided in coordination with Skagit Transit if the project is located on a transit route. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.090  Violations.

             (1)    Pursuant to RCW  58.17.300 , it is a gross misdemeanor to sell, offer for sale, lease, or transfer any  lot , tract, or parcel of land in violation of RCW Chapter  58.17  or this Chapter.

             (2)    Each sale, offer for sale, lease, or transfer of each separate  lot , tract, or parcel is a separate and distinct offense.

             (3)    This Chapter may also be enforced per SCC Chapter  14.09 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.100  Preliminary approval—Application requirements.

             (1)    In addition to the  application  requirements of SCC  14.06.230 , an  application  for preliminary approval of a  land division  must include:

             (a)    A preliminary  land division  map, prepared by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, that includes the following:

             (i)    The name and address of all owners of record, the developer, and the registered land surveyor or registered engineer preparing the plat;

             (ii)    Legal description of the boundaries of the land;

             (iii)    A certificate by a registered land surveyor certifying that the boundaries of the land have been surveyed and monumented and that all  distances  and bearings on the preliminary plat are accurate;

             (iv)    Section map showing the boundary of the plat in relation to the section, with notation of Section, Township, and Range. This information may be done as an insert drawn to a convenient scale or included within the boundary of the parcel as approved by the  Director ;

             (v)    A vicinity sketch at a minimum scale of two inches equals one mile;

             (vi)    Number and dimensions of all proposed  lots  and tracts, which must be sequentially numbered or lettered;

             (vii)    The square footage and acreage of each individual  lot ;

             (viii)    Total acreage of the portion to be platted, adjacent tracts when under the same ownership, and of individual phases;

             (ix)    The date, scale (written and graphic), and a north arrow;

             (x)    The scale must be provided suitable to the size of the project;

             (xi)    Existing  structures  including  building  envelopes and  building  setback lines;

             (xii)    The layout of existing and conceptual horizontal layout of proposed  roads  and utilities, including existing and proposed easements;

             (xiii)    The location of municipal boundaries, township lines, and section lines;

             (xiv)    The location, width and names of existing and proposed  roads ;

             (xv)    Additional  right-of-way  required for substandard  roads . Proposed  roads  must be differentiated as such;

             (xvi)    Names of all  roads  serving four or more existing or proposed  lots ;

             (xvii)     Building  front, rear and side  setback  lines with  distance  from the property line indicated. This may be shown by a typical insert;

             (xviii)    All horizontal control survey work must be Class “3.” Angular error of closure must not exceed 20 feet √N. The total linear error of closure must not exceed 1/5,000;

             (xix)    Maximum error in feet must not exceed +/- 0.26 feet;

             (xx)    A survey of the portion of the section in which the plat is located showing the original or established corners, a description and the original traverse of the same showing error of closure and method of balancing must also be submitted. This is to be accompanied by a  subdivision  insert showing all calculations necessary to determine the corners and  distances  of the plat;

             (xxi)    Floodway and floodplain lines;

             (xxii)    Notation of flood hazard  zone  and map panel reference number;

             (xxiii)     Protected critical area  buffers pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.24 ,  Critical Areas  Ordinance;

             (xxiv)    If the  land division  is to be served by a well or wells, the area reserved for the well and the protection of same must be shown on the plat;

             (xxv)    The location of any  wellhead protection areas  within the  subject property  from any adjacent off-site wells;

             (b)    A title report issued within 90  days  of  application , showing all  persons  having an ownership interest, a legal description describing exterior boundary of  application  site and listing all encumbrances affecting said site;

             (c)    A completed environmental checklist, if required by SCC Chapter  16.12 , State Environmental Policy Act, and WAC Chapter  197-11 ;

             (d)    Proposed articles of incorporation, bylaws, and covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), if any;

             (e)    If  critical areas  are present on the site or within 200 feet, a  critical areas  assessment pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.24 ;

             (f)    The method of sewage disposal, including soil data, if individual sewage disposal is used, or if public sewer or  community septic  disposal is to be used, the name of the system, and letter of approval;

             (g)    Compliance with all provisions outlined in SCC  12.48.240 (1) (water requirements for  land division ) and any applicable State and Federal regulations regarding water use;

             (h)    All restrictions proposed to be imposed on the use of the land;

             (i)    A  stormwater  site plan per SCC Chapter  14.32 ;

             (j)    Documentation of the date and method of original segregation for the  subject property  verifying that the  lot  or  lots  were not created in violation of the  short subdivision  or  subdivision  laws in effect at the time of creation;

             (k)    A list of any other permit  applications  having been filed for the same site;

             (l)    Any required fees;

             (m)    Any additional information determined to be necessary to demonstrate compliance with other portions of the Skagit County Code;

             (n)    If any portion of a proposed  land division  is located within a flood control  zone  as provided in RCW Chapter  86.16 , written approval from the State  Department  of  Ecology  per RCW  58.17.120 ; and

             (o)    If access is proposed off of a State highway, evidence of the  application  for a state access permit.

             (2)    Additional Requirements for a  Long Subdivision . In addition to the requirements of Subsection (1) of this Section, an  application  for a  long subdivision  must include:

             (a)    Ground contours with intervals of five feet or less;

             (b)    Location, number, and description of types of any existing and proposed community recreational facilities on site;

             (c)    A conceptual  grading  plan showing proposed  clearing  and vegetation retention pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.24  and proposed topography detailed to five-foot contours.

             (3)    The  Director  may waive specific  application  requirements determined to be unnecessary for review of the  application .

             (4)    Phased Development.

             (a)    An  application  that proposes to develop a site in phases must also include a phasing plan.

             (b)    The phasing plan must describe any site improvements designed to relate to, benefit, or be used by the entire development (such as  stormwater  detention  pond  or tennis courts in a residential development); and must relate completion of such improvements to completion of one or more phases or stages of the entire development.

             (c)    Once a phasing plan has been approved, the information contained therein must be shown on, or the phasing plan must be attached to and made a part of, the  land division .

             (d)    Approval of a phasing plan does not constitute approval of the  land division . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.110  Preliminary approval—Review criteria.

             (1)    An  application  for preliminary approval of a  land division  is subject to the type of review specified in SCC  14.06.150 .

             (2)    An  application  for preliminary approval of a  land division  must be evaluated for conformity with:

             (a)    The requirements of this Chapter, especially SCC  14.74.050 , General requirements;

             (b)    The dimensional and other requirements of the applicable zone(s), or SCC Chapter  14.76 , Standards for Special  Land Divisions , or 14.78 Standards for  CaRD  Land Divisions, as applicable;

             (c)    SCC Chapter  12.05 , On-Site Sewage Code—Rules and Regulations;

             (d)    SCC  12.48.240 , Water requirements for  land divisions ;

             (e)    SCC Chapter  14.24 ,  Critical Areas ;

             (f)    SCC Chapter  14.32 ,  Stormwater  Management; and

             (g)    SCC Chapter  14.62 , Concurrency.

             (3)    Based on the criteria in this Section, the proposed  land division  may be granted preliminary approval or approval with conditions, or may be denied. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.120  Preliminary approval—Revisions.

             An  application  to revise a  land division  that has received preliminary approval, but not final approval, must comply with the following:

             (1)    A revision that results in any substantial changes as determined by the  Director , must be treated as a new  application  for purposes of vesting and must be reviewed under the same process required for a preliminary approval. For the purpose of this Section, substantial change includes:

             (a)    The creation of additional  lots ;

             (b)    Changes in access points that are inconsistent with the  Road  Standards; or

             (c)    Changes in the proposal that lead to built or natural environmental impacts that were not addressed in the original approval.

             (2)    When revising an approved preliminary  land division  to a  CaRD , only half of the original  application  fees may be charged.

             (3)    Approval of the following modifications by the  Department  are not substantial revisions:

             (a)    Engineering design, unless the proposed design alters or eliminates features specifically required as a condition of preliminary  land division  approval;

             (b)    Changes in  lot  dimensions that are consistent with SCC Title  14  Division 1, Zoning and Land Uses, or the applicable provisions in SCC Chapter  14.76  or  14.78 ;

             (c)    A decrease in the number of  lots  to be created. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.130  Preliminary approval—Duration of validity.

             (1)    A preliminary  land division  must receive final approval for  lots  to be created and eligible for sale.

             (2)    A preliminary  land division  must obtain final approval within the following time periods:

             (a)    Preliminary  short subdivision  approval is valid for 36 months.

             (b)    Preliminary  long subdivision  approval is valid for the time period listed in RCW  58.17.140 , as amended.

             (3)    If any condition is not satisfied and the final  land division  is not recorded within the approval period, the preliminary plat approval is null and void.

             (4)    If the final plat is being developed in phases, the initial phase must be recorded within the approval period, or the  land division  is null and void. Additional phases may continue to have validity, based on a phasing schedule established by the preliminary approval.

             (5)    Any  applicant  who has received preliminary short or  long subdivision  approval who submits a request for extension in writing to the  Director  at least 30  days  before the preliminary approval expiration date may be granted a one-year extension of the preliminary approval by the  Director  or designee upon a showing that the  applicant  has attempted in good faith to submit the final  land division  within the preliminary approval period set forth in Subsections (2)(a) and (2)(b) of this Section. Only two such extensions may be allowed.

             (6)    Any  applicant  who has received preliminary short or  long subdivision  approval on or before April 1, 2014, who submits a request for extension in writing to the  Director  at least 30  days  before the preliminary approval expiration date may be granted a one-year extension of the preliminary approval by the  Director  or designee upon a showing that the  applicant  has attempted in good faith to submit the final  land division  within the preliminary approval period set forth in Subsections (2)(a) and (2)(b) of this Section. Only 10 total extensions may be allowed pursuant to this Subsection and Subsection (5) of this Section.

             (7)    Approval of any extension may contain additional or altered conditions and requirements, including a requirement that  stormwater  designs be updated to reflect  stormwater  requirements in effect at the time of the  application  for an extension. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.140  Construction plan approval.

             (1)    Engineering plans for  roads  and other proposed or conditioned public improvements must be prepared and submitted by the  applicant  and reviewed and approved by the County Engineer prior to the commencement of on-site  clearing  or construction activities and approval of the  final subdivision .

             (2)    Construction plans may be submitted for review during the pendency of the preliminary plat  application , but may need to be revised after preliminary plat approval to conform to the conditions of approval. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.200  Final approval—Application requirements.

             (1)    Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to specify provisions that must be satisfied prior to the final approval and recording of final  land division  maps, for those preliminarily approved long and  short subdivisions . Issuance of  building permits  or sale or lease of  lots  within a  land division  is not permitted until the final  land division  is recorded with one exception. In recognition of the original  building  right, one  building permit  on the original parcel may be pursued during the  subdivision  process, so long as it conforms to the  preliminary subdivision .

                 In addition to the general  application  requirements of SCC  14.06.230 , an  application  for final approval of a  subdivision  must include:

             (a)    A  final subdivision  map drawn consistent with the specifications for a  preliminary subdivision  map in SCC  14.74.100  and showing:

             (i)    A scale not less than 100 feet to the inch, unless otherwise determined by the  Director , on maps 18 inches by 24 inches, with a two-inch border on the left edge, and one-half-inch border on all other sides;

             (ii)    All existing monuments of record, courses and  distance  necessary to re-stake any portion of said plat from said map. All other surrounding property must be labeled in dotted lines whether platted or otherwise;

             (iii)    Bearings of all  lots , tracts, and centerlines of public and  private roads  within the project boundary;

             (iv)    Individual  lot  accesses,  distance  of accesses to property lines, and  road  names;

             (v)    A certificate giving a full and correct description of the lands divided as they appear on the plat, including a statement that the  subdivision  has been made with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owner or owners;

             (vi)    Official seals of attesting officers and of the registered land surveyor who platted said property must be platted on the final tracing;

             (vii)    The final plat must show acknowledgments,  dedications , Treasurer’s certificate, approvals by the Chairman of the Board of County Commissioners, the Hearing Examiner, the County Engineer or  Director  of Public Works, the  Director  of Planning and Development Services, and the County Health Officer or their designees, and the certificate of the registered land surveyor who platted said property. Any conditions of approval will be noted on the face of the plat, or reference must be made to any recorded documents containing conditions of approval or any pertinent covenants and restrictions. The  subdivision  must contain all certifications required by the County based on the most current standard plat notes, plat water notes as required by SCC  12.48.240 (3), and any other notes or certifications that the  Director  determines are necessary to satisfy the conditions of plat approval;

             (viii)    All proposed  lots  less than five acres in size will require the well-protection zone(s) and approved on-site sewage system area(s) to be shown on all preliminary and final plat maps. If the well-protection  zone  exercises the right to provide this sanitary control of the land through other legal provisions, such as recorded covenants or easements, these must be depicted on or recorded references must be shown on the plat;

             (ix)    When a  private road  is included in the  land division  the following note must be included on the final plat:

             In no case may the County accept a  dedication  or any obligation as to any such  road ,  street , and/or alley until the same and all  roads ,  streets , and/or alleys connecting the same to the full, current County  road  system have been brought to full, current County  Road  Standards and a  right-of-way  deed has been transferred to and accepted by the County;

             (x)    The final plat must contain a note that states:

             (A)    The total amount of  impervious surface  that the common  stormwater facility  is designed to accommodate; and

             (B)    For each  lot , the amount of  impervious surface  that the common  stormwater facility  is designed to accommodate;

             (b)    A certification from the Skagit County Treasurer’s Office that property taxes for the  subject property  are not delinquent;

             (c)    A deposit to cover anticipated taxes and assessments, for the current year is required for final  short subdivisions , and for the current year and next year for final  long subdivisions ;

             (d)    All required fees, including required bonding, and fees in lieu;

             (e)    An electronic copy of protective deed covenants, if applicable. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.210  Final approval—Review criteria.

             (1)    An  application  for final approval of a  land division  is subject to the type of review specified in SCC  14.06.150 .

             (2)    An  application  for final approval of a  land division  may be approved only if:

             (a)    The  application  demonstrates conformity with all the conditions in the preliminary approval.

             (b)    Each plat set or document must be stamped, signed, and dated by a professional surveyor.

             (c)    The improvements required by the preliminary approval have been constructed, except that improvements may be bonded as allowed by:

             (i)    SCC Chapter  14.66  for public works standards;

             (ii)    SCC Chapter  12.05  for on-site sewage; and

             (iii)    SCC Chapter  12.48  for drinking water.

             (d)    If public sewer or  community septic  disposal is to be used, the system must be constructed and stub-outs provided to each  lot  or appropriately bonded pursuant to SCC  12.48.190  and SCC Chapter  12.05 .

             (e)    The design and construction of  drainage facilities  must comply with SCC Chapter  14.32 ,  Stormwater  Management, and any easement for inspection or maintenance required by that Chapter must be provided to Skagit County.

             (f)    One-inch diameter iron pipes or one-half-inch rebar with identifying plastic cap must have been set at all  lot  corners (pipe length determined by soil conditions); cased monuments must be set in asphalt  roads .  Temporary  staking may be substituted prior to and during construction. Final staking must be completed after utilities have been installed and  roads  constructed to subgrade standards.

             (g)     Roads  leading to or within a plat or  subdivision , whether dedicated public  roads  or  private roads , are constructed in compliance with  Skagit County road standards  unless otherwise approved by the County Engineer.

             (3)    In no case may the County accept a  dedication  or any obligation as to any such  road ,  street , or alley until the same and all  roads ,  streets , and alleys connecting the same to the County  road  system have been brought to full, current County  road  standards and a  right-of-way  deed has been transferred to and accepted by the County.

             (4)    Where a  driveway  easement provides access to a  lot  not accessible directly from a  road  built to  Skagit County road standards , the  driveway  must be built to  driveway  standards contained in the International Fire Code Section 503 as amended by Skagit County prior to final plat approval.  Driveway  easements must be a minimum of 20 feet wide and must have additional width as required to contain any cuts, fills and slopes required to build a  driveway .

             (5)    All final plats submitted for approval must be accompanied by the written recommendation for approval or denial by the County Health  Department  or other agency furnishing sewage disposal and supplying water as to the adequacy of the proposed means of sewage disposal and water supply, including approval of the engineering details for such facilities. Prior to approval by the Skagit County Health Officer, engineering design and construction documents that comply with WAC Chapters  246-290  and  246-291 , as-built documents approved by the purveyor or its designee, and a letter of acceptance by the purveyor must all be acknowledged in writing, and placed on file by the Planning  Department . Requests for final approval must comply with SCC  12.48.240 (2) and SCC Chapter  12.05 , On-Site Sewage Code—Rules and Regulations.

             (6)    All  final subdivisions  submitted for approval must be accompanied by the written recommendation for approval or denial from the County Engineer. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.220  Final approval—Recording.

             (1)    All final plats must be recorded in the County Auditor’s Office.

             (2)    Final plats may not be recorded until:

             (a)    Approved by the  decisionmaker  on the  application ; and

             (b)    All required fees have been paid by the  applicant .

             (3)    The  Department  is responsible for recording of the final plat within 30  days  of approval.

             (4)    After the plat tracing has been filed for record with the County Auditor, it becomes the property of Skagit County.

             (5)     Lot certification  for newly created  lots  must be issued and recorded for all  lots  upon recording of the plat map, either separately or as a note on the short plat or plat map. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.300  Alterations.

             (1)    Alterations after a  final subdivision  has been approved and recorded must:

             (a)    Be processed in accordance with RCW  58.17.215  through  58.17.218 ; and

             (b)    Comply with regulations in effect at the time the  application  for an alteration is submitted.

             (2)     Application  Requirements.

             (a)    An  application  for an alteration and recording documents must contain the signatures of the majority of those  persons  having an ownership interest in  lots , tracts, parcels or divisions in the subject  subdivision  to be altered or any portion to be altered.

             (b)    If the  final subdivision  is subject to restrictive covenants that were filed at the time of the approval of the  final subdivision , and the  application  for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the  application  must contain an agreement based on the terms and conditions of the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the  subdivision  or portion thereof.

             (c)    Any features contained in the original  land division  that has been relied upon in subsequent land development or County planning decisions must be incorporated into the alteration.

             (3)    Review.

             (a)    An  application  for an alteration of an approved final short or  long subdivision  is subject to the type of review specified in SCC  14.06.150 .

             (b)    The  application  may be approved if the proposed alteration is consistent with the requirements of the applicable  land division  code.

             (c)    After approval of an alteration, the  applicant  must produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the  final subdivision , to be processed in the same manner as set forth in this Chapter for final approvals of a  land division . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.74.400  Vacations.

             (1)    An  application  for a vacation of a  subdivision  is subject to the type of review specified in SCC  14.06.150  and must follow the requirements of RCW  58.17.212 .

             (2)    An  application  for vacation of a County  road  may be processed pursuant to this Chapter only when such a vacation is proposed in conjunction with the vacation of the plat. An  application  for a vacation limited to one or more County  roads  must be processed in accordance with RCW Chapter  36.87  and SCC Chapter  11.08 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))