Chapter 14.57 URBAN RESERVE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT (URDP)

         Chapter 14.57
URBAN RESERVE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT (URDP)

             Sections:

              14.57.010    Purpose.

              14.57.020    Applicability.

              14.57.030    Application requirements.

              14.57.040    Review criteria.

        14.57.010  Purpose.

             The purpose of the  Urban Reserve Development Permit  is to allow urban levels of commercial or industrial development within a UGA  zone  prior to annexation if appropriate provision for sewer service is arranged. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.57.020  Applicability.

             This Chapter applies to all  applications  for  project permits  to construct commercial or industrial  buildings  of larger size than is allowed in the URR, URC-I and URP-OS  zones . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.57.030  Application requirements.

             (1)    In addition to the general requirements of SCC  14.06.230 , an  application  must include a determination regarding sewer service as follows:

             (a)    The  applicant  must obtain and submit a determination from the  city  in whose UGA the project is located that adequate provision has been made for sewer service to the project.

             (b)    “Adequate provision for sewer service” means:

             (i)    Either an agreement for concurrent extension of sewer service to the property as a condition of URDP approval; or

             (ii)    An agreement between the  city  and the  property owner  for extension of and connection to sewer at a date certain in the future.

             (c)    The terms of such agreement regarding provision of sewer are between the  city  and the  property owner . This determination by the  city  is within the  city ’s sole discretion, as the sewer service provider, and is not subject to  appeal  by or to the County under any circumstances. Each  city  must establish its own procedures and criteria for reviewing and deciding these requests for determination regarding sewer service in the unincorporated UGA, including, but not limited to, whether the  city  will agree to any extensions outside of the  city  limits without annexation.

             (d)    The agreement between the owner and the  city  referenced in this Section may be, but need not be, a development agreement authorized by RCW  36.70B.170 , and Skagit County may be a party to the agreement pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.53 .

             (e)    If the  property owner  is unable to obtain  city  agreement regarding sewer, then the owner is not eligible to apply to the County for a Hearing Examiner URDP. The County may not grant any  variance  from this sewer service determination requirement. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.57.040  Review criteria.

             (1)    An  application  for a URDP is subject to the type of review shown in SCC  14.06.150 .

             (2)    In addition to any requirements or criteria applicable to the requested use or proposed construction found elsewhere in this Code, the  application  must meet the following requirements:

             (a)    The  application  meets the criteria for a special use permit in SCC  14.51.050 .

             (b)    The proposal complies with all of the  dimensional standards , design review standards, landscaping, parking and signage requirements for the  city  in whose UGA the property is located. Staff from the applicable municipality will assist with this review.

             (c)    Any proposed commercial or industrial use meets any requirements for such use found in the commercial or industrial  zone  of the  city  in whose UGA the property is located.

             (d)    The proposal provides for construction of planned public facilities and services consistent with requirements for similar size or intensity development, if it had been annexed to the  city  in whose UGA the project is located. The  decisionmaker  must evaluate the plans, ordinances, and development standards of the  city  in whose UGA the project is located in making this determination.

             (e)    The proposal will be required to participate in and connect to sanitary sewer service, consistent with the requirements of the  city  determination regarding sewer service.

             (f)    The proposal, as conditioned, provides for its pro rata share of mitigation for off-site traffic impacts that are directly related to the proposed development, consistent with applicable  city  and County transportation concurrency requirements. The County must use its  SEPA  review process, including a requirement for a project-specific impact assessment, as necessary to identify the level of project-specific direct impact and appropriate mitigation.

             (3)    The  applicant  must bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that each of the requirements are met. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))