Chapter 14.56 MASTER PLANNED RESORTS

         Chapter 14.56
MASTER PLANNED RESORTS

             Sections:

              14.56.010    Purpose.

              14.56.020    Applicability.

              14.56.030    Allowable uses.

              14.56.040    Minimum standards for master planned resorts (MPRs).

              14.56.050    Application requirements.

              14.56.060    Master plan requirements.

              14.56.065    Formal site-specific Comprehensive Plan amendment process.

              14.56.070    SEPA environmental review.

              14.56.080    Project permit.

              14.56.090    Modifications and amendments to adopted master plans.

              14.56.100    New master plan for an existing resort.

              14.56.110    Decision-making authority.

              14.56.120    Criteria for approval.

              14.56.130    Time limits for approved developments.

        14.56.010  Purpose.

             Skagit County has a wide range of natural features and amenities, including climate, vegetation, water, natural resources, scenic qualities, cultural, and geological features, which are desirable for a wide range of recreational users to enjoy. New master planned resorts authorized by RCW  36.70A.360  and existing master planned resorts authorized by RCW  36.70A.362  offer an opportunity to utilize these special features for enjoyment and recreational use, while bringing significant economic diversification and benefits to rural communities. The purpose of this Section is to establish a Master Planned Resort land use designation to be applied to those properties the Board of County Commissioners determines are appropriate for development as a master planned resort consistent with the  Comprehensive Plan  and RCW  36.70A.360  through  36.70A.362 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.010)

        14.56.020  Applicability.

             “Master Planned Resort” (MPR) is a land use designation established under the  Comprehensive Plan . Master planned resorts are generally larger in scale, and involve greater potential impacts on the surrounding area, than uses permitted under the Small-Scale Recreation and Tourism designation. Master planned resorts may be designated as either existing master planned resorts pursuant to RCW  36.70A.362  or new master planned resorts pursuant to RCW  36.70A.360 . Designation of any master planned resort requires compliance with the provisions of this Section and a formal site-specific amendment to the  Comprehensive Plan  Land Use Map subject to SCC Chapter  14.08 . The requirements of this Section do not apply to any development for which a permit has been granted or for which a complete permit  application  has been submitted prior to the adoption of this Code. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.020)

        14.56.030  Allowable uses.

             (1)    Generally. Master planned resorts (MPRs) must consist of predominantly short-term visitor accommodations and associated indoor and/or outdoor recreational facilities, and commercial, professional or conference facilities and activities that support and are integrated with the resort in a setting of significant natural amenities. These facilities must be primarily designed to serve the resort visitors, either day visitors or overnight visitors, but may also provide some goods and services for the surrounding permanent residential population. The master planned resort commercial facilities may be larger than those otherwise permitted in rural commercial areas but must be incidental to the resort itself. MPRs may include some other permanent residential uses, including caretakers’ or employees’ residences and some vacation home properties, provided they meet the requirements of this Chapter and are integrated into the resort and consistent with the on-site recreational nature of the resort.

             (2)    Specific Allowable Uses. Specific allowable uses and their locations within a master planned resort are determined during the development of the resort master plan and are subject to final determination as a part of the master plan approval process. The following uses may generally be allowed within a Master Planned Resort classification authorized in compliance with RCW  36.70A.360  through  36.70A.362 :

             (a)    All residential uses including single-family and multifamily  structures , condominiums, time-share and fractionally owned accommodations, provided such uses are integrated into and support the on-site recreational nature of the master planned resort; provided, that permanent residential uses may constitute no more than 20 percent of the total resort accommodation units.

             (b)    Short-term visitor accommodations, including, but not limited to, hotels, motels, lodges, cottages, yurts; time-share and fractionally owned units; tent camping sites within an established  campground ;  cabins ,  campgrounds , and  recreational vehicle  (RV) sites and other residential uses, that are made available for short-term rental. Short-term visitor accommodations (not including  employee housing  units) may constitute no less than 80 percent of the total resort accommodation units.

             (c)    Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities and uses, including, but not necessarily limited to:  golf courses  (including accessory  structures  and facilities, such as clubhouses, practice facilities, and maintenance facilities), tennis and other sport courts, swimming pools,  marinas  and boat launches, alpine and/or cross-country skiing, hiking and nature  trails , bicycle paths, equestrian facilities, sports complexes, and other recreational uses deemed to be consistent with the on-site recreational nature of the master planned resort and its setting of significant natural amenities.

             (d)    Visitor-oriented amenities, including, but not limited to, (i) eating and drinking establishments, (ii) gaming establishments allowed by law, (iii) meeting facilities, (iv) on-site retail businesses and services which are designed to serve the needs of the resort users such as gas stations, espresso stands, bakeries, delicatessens, beauty salons and spas, gift shops, art galleries, craft sales, food stores, and real estate/property management offices, and (v) recreation-oriented businesses and facilities such as sporting goods, outdoor recreation guide services, helicopter and hot air balloon recreational flight services, and outdoor equipment rental and sales.

             (e)    Cultural and educational facilities, including, but not limited to, interpretative/information centers and exhibits, indoor and outdoor theaters and entertainment facilities, festival sites and  museums .

             (f)    Capital facilities, telecommunication and networking facilities, utilities and ancillary support services to the extent necessary to maintain and operate the master planned resort.

             (g)     Temporary  and/or permanent  structures  to serve as sales offices.

             (h)     Signs  consistent with the provisions of the  sign  code (SCC Chapter  14.29 ).

             (i)    Any other similar uses deemed by the  decisionmaker  to be consistent with the purpose and intent of this Section, the  Comprehensive Plan  policies regarding master planned resorts, and RCW  36.70A.360  through  36.70A.362 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110007 Attch. 1 (part); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.030)

        14.56.040  Minimum standards for master planned resorts (MPRs).

             The following standards govern consideration of master planned resorts (MPRs):

             (1)    Self-Contained Development. All necessary supportive and accessory on-site commercial and other services must be contained within the boundaries of the MPR, and such services must be oriented to serve the MPR and be incidental to the resort itself, but may also provide goods and services for the surrounding population. MPRs may constitute  urban growth  outside of  urban growth areas  as limited by RCW  36.70A.360  and  36.70A.362 . New urban development and land uses, however, are prohibited outside the boundaries of an MPR.

             (2)    Compatibility. Based on associated impacts and an overall evaluation of the site based on the requirements of this Chapter, an MPR may be limited in intensity, location and/or prohibited if found to measurably degrade adopted levels of service for capital facilities and  public services , water availability, water quality and/or the  rural character  or economic viability of adjacent rural or resource lands and activities.

             (3)    Settings of Significant Natural Amenities. MPRs may only be located in areas that have significant, predominantly natural area views and extraordinary landscape characteristics such as certain forests, shorelines, or mountains in a scenic, relatively remote rural setting. It is the County’s intention that MPRs be located in settings of significant natural amenities—meaning settings that constitute rare and exceptional natural scenery and features of such quality as to be deemed significant, when compared to the generally scenic qualities of the overall Skagit County landscape. The setting of significant natural amenities together with the recreational activities and uses proposed for an MPR must be the primary attraction for visitors and guests to the resort. Examples of these potentially significant settings include but are not necessarily limited to: the Skagit River, saltwater islands and/or bays, major  lakes , and remote mountainous regions.

             (4)    Location. MPRs may not be located inside of or adjacent to designated  urban growth areas . MPRs must not be located on designated Ag-NRL lands. Generally, MPRs may not be located along the I-5 corridor.

             (5)    Size Limits. MPRs must not exceed 300 total accommodation units, including both short-term visitor accommodations and units intended for permanent residential occupancy.

             (6)    Design Standards. MPRs must be developed with harmonious siting, architectural theme, landscaping and design standards that are compatible with the  rural character  and natural amenities of the site and surrounding area. The master planned resort must be situated and designed in such a manner as to screen the development and its impacts from adjacent areas. The minimum  lot  area, width, frontage, landscaping, yard and screening requirements,  setbacks ,  street  and parking standards and  building  heights may be modified from those normally found in the Rural or Natural Resource Land designations consistent with the character of the MPR and necessary to meet the requirements of this Chapter.

             (7)    Capital Facilities, Utilities and  Public Services . The capital facilities, utilities and services owned and operated by the resort, including those related to sewer, water,  stormwater ,  solid waste  management, security, fire suppression, and emergency medical service, provided on site must be limited to meeting the needs of the resort. These facilities, utilities, and services may also be provided by outside service providers, such as the County or special purpose districts; provided, that the resort pays all costs associated with service extension capacity increases, or new services that are directly attributable to the resort; and provided, that the nature of the facilities and services provided are adequate to meet the increased needs of the resort, based on the planned concentration of guests,  structures  and other facility, utility and service demands. Typical funding strategies for financing service, facility and utility extension costs may be considered to pay for costs attributed to the resort. All required public improvements including  roads , utilities and public facilities that are part of the approved resort master plan must be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the  building  official or installation guaranteed by the posting of performance  bonds  or other surety acceptable to the prosecuting attorney in an amount of 150 percent of the estimated cost of the outstanding improvements, except that all life/safety improvements must be installed and in operation prior to occupancy.

             (8)     Open Space . MPRs must contain abundant  open space  sufficient for buffering and providing recreational amenities while also maintaining the natural amenities and  rural character  of the area. “ Open space ” means any land that is retained in a substantially natural condition or is improved for recreational uses such as  golf courses , hiking or nature  trails , equestrian or bicycle paths, water features, lands protected as  critical areas , lands preserved for  farm  or forest use, and lands used as  buffers .  Open space  does not include lands used for  residential lots  or yards,  streets  or parking, etc.

             (9)    Shorelines. MPRs located within the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Management Act must comply with the provisions of the Skagit County  Shoreline Master Program .  Application  for an amendment to the Skagit County  Shoreline Master Program  (SMP) to change the shoreline use designation for a site-specific MPR may occur concurrently with the  application  for a site-specific MPR  Comprehensive Plan  Land Use Map amendment. In addition to the requirements in the  SMP , review of an  application  for an MPR site-specific shoreline use designation amendment must include consideration of the following factors:

             (a)    MPRs and the shorelines within their boundaries may constitute urban development in an otherwise rural setting as specified in RCW  36.70A.360  though 36.70A.362;

             (b)    MPRs may include areas of active shoreline recreational, commercial and residential uses, including shoreline-dependent uses, and provisions for public shoreline access;

             (c)    MPR shorelines may include activities allowed in more than one shoreline use designation within the same MPR;

             (d)    MPRs may include shoreline uses that incorporate urban and/or rural shoreline development standards in different areas within the same MPR; and

             (e)    Existing resorts may incorporate historic uses and lawfully established vested rights, as applicable, in determining shoreline-specific standards.

             (10)    Phasing. Phasing of an MPR may be allowed. Any phasing of an MPR must be done in such a manner that the initial phase(s) will stand alone as a self-contained MPR consistent with the requirements of this Chapter (including permanent to short-term accommodation ratio), even if subsequent phases do not occur. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part). Formerly 14.20.040)

        14.56.050  Application requirements.

             New MPR  applications  for a  Comprehensive Plan  Land Use Map amendment require legislative approval by the Board of County Commissioners. Such  applications  must include the following:

             (1)    A request for a site-specific  Comprehensive Plan  Land Use Map amendment necessary to meet the requirements of this Section and SCC Chapter  14.08 .

             (2)    A draft resort master plan prepared to meet the requirements of SCC  14.56.060 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.050)

        14.56.060  Master plan requirements.

             The master plan provides the framework for development of the MPR and is intended to ensure that the proposed resort meets the requirements of this Chapter. The MPR master plan must be a bound document with a table of contents, maps, graphics and narrative that describes the long-range plan for the MPR and the design and development standards that will apply to the MPR. The following information is required:

             (1)    A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed development to external  road  systems, nearby natural features, amenities and other land uses within one mile of the project boundary.

             (2)    A proposed  site plan  drawn to a scale of at least 100 feet to one inch that must include:

             (a)    The location and boundaries of the proposed MPR;

             (b)    Location of existing land uses and activities, significant natural features and amenities, vegetation types,  critical areas , and  road  systems within the  project area ;

             (c)    Topographic contours at five-foot intervals or as otherwise specified;

             (d)    A clear illustration of the proposed development activity and proposed land uses and  structures  indicating generalized  building footprints , exterior design and/or elevation views;

             (e)    Proposed locations and dimensions of all  open space ; and

             (f)    If the development is proposed to occur in phases, a graphic breakdown of each phase as it relates to the whole development and its general timetable for completion, including project phasing of commercial retail uses.

             (3)    The proposed MPR preliminary development schedule, including phasing, if any, identifying the specific sequence and anticipated dates of development, and types of activities proposed.

             (4)    Descriptive narrative detailing the principles and standards used to develop the MPR. Such text must address each required resort master plan element with a description of how it complies with RCW Chapter  36.70A , the Skagit County  Comprehensive Plan , and this Chapter, including the MPR decision approval criteria of this Chapter.

             (5)    A land use element including:

             (a)    Identification and inventory of the existing land uses within the proposed MPR, including, where applicable, previously permitted or vested uses and  structures  that, although not proposed for specific approval through the MPR process due to their preexisting or prior approval status, nevertheless are intended to function as integral parts of the proposed MPR; provided, that any such use included in a proposed resort master plan and identified for specific  development approval  through this Chapter must be reviewed based on the regulations in place at the time of the MPR  application ;

             (b)    Identification of the location, type, size and densities of proposed land uses within the MPR, including visitor accommodations,  employee housing , commercial and recreation amenities, and other residential and nonresidential development activities;

             (c)    An analysis of the ability of the proposed MPR to support the total proposed growth within the MPR, including an economic impact and feasibility analysis of the proposed development prepared by a  qualified professional  economist or financial analyst. The analysis must address the economic viability of the proposed development, the basis for the setting of significant natural amenities and associated recreational activities as the primary visitor attraction of the proposed resort, and evidence of financial and other resources available to develop the project, and identify the fiscal impacts of the project including changes in employment, tax revenue, demand for increased levels of  public services , housing for employees and the effects of loss of resource lands during the life of the project;

             (d)    Identify the location, size and function of proposed  open space ,  buffers , recreational areas and activities and significant natural amenities, including deed restrictions that will assure that the  open space  areas are maintained as  open space  in perpetuity;

             (e)    An explanation of how the proposed MPR has been sited or designed to avoid or minimize adverse effects or conflicts on adjacent lands.

             (6)    A housing element including:

             (a)    An inventory and analysis of existing and projected short-term visitor accommodations and residential units proposed for permanent or long-term occupancy, including type and variety, and any  employee housing  necessary for the proposal. The analysis must include both present and anticipated needs of all types of housing during the life of the project.

             (7)    A transportation element including:

             (a)    An inventory of the general location and capacity of all existing public and  private roads , transit, air, water, rail and pedestrian/bicycle routes, where applicable;

             (b)    The general layout of all proposed transportation improvements, including construction design standards and profiles for all  roads , parking areas and pedestrian/bicycle  trails  for all phases of the project;

             (c)    A traffic analysis and traffic impact study addressing site access, traffic generated by the proposal, levels of service, circulation patterns, and turning movements;

             (d)    Identification of on-site and off-site measures needed to mitigate the impacts generated from the proposal.

             (8)    A resource lands and  critical areas  element including:

             (a)    Identification, inventory and analysis of the potential impacts on resource lands of  long-term commercial significance  including forest,  agriculture  and  mineral  lands within, adjacent to or affected by the proposed MPR. The analysis must also include proposed measures to mitigate impacts generated by the proposal on affected resource lands, and, if applicable, document that the proposal is better suited and has more long-term importance as an MPR than for  natural resource lands  of  long-term commercial significance ;

             (b)    Identification, inventory and analysis of  critical areas  and potential impacts in accordance with SCC Chapter  14.24  (Critical Areas). The analysis must also include proposed measures to mitigate impacts generated by the proposal on affected  critical areas .

             (9)    A capital facilities and utilities element including:

             (a)    An inventory of the location and capacity of all existing utilities and capital facilities, including, but not limited to, electricity, sanitary sewage disposal, domestic and irrigation water,  stormwater  management,  solid waste  management, law enforcement/security, fire protection and other applicable utilities, emergency services or capital facilities;

             (b)    An analysis of the proposed demand for capital facilities and utilities generated by the proposed MPR, over the lifetime of the development, and a description of the proposed method of providing all utility system needs, including the location and sizing of the utility systems and financing mechanisms to ensure timely delivery of those services and facilities to the proposed MPR;

             (c)    An estimate of water demands for the proposed MPR at maximum buildout by category of consumption and availability of water to meet the estimated demands, including (i) identification of the proposed source; (ii) identification of all available information on ground and  surface waters  relevant to the determination of adequacy of the water supply to serve the proposed MPR; and (iii) a water conservation plan indicating available measures commonly used to reduce water consumption;

             (d)    Project phasing and other project-specific conditions to mitigate impacts generated by the proposal on affected  public services , utilities and capital facilities.

             (10)    A design and development standards element including:

             (a)    Bulk, design and  dimensional standards  that must be implemented throughout subsequent development within the proposed MPR;

             (b)    The type and range of uses authorized for any  building ,  structure  or other anticipated development activity within the MPR;

             (c)    Architectural character and design requirements for  buildings  and  structures ;

             (d)    Other requirements or design standards that will be applied to the MPR through project buildout, as determined by the reviewing authority;

             (e)     Stormwater  design and construction requirements;

             (f)    Sanitary sewer and water design and construction requirements;

             (g)    Landscaping requirements that will be applied to the development;

             (h)     Sign  standards and requirements. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.060)

        14.56.065  Formal site-specific Comprehensive Plan amendment process.

             A master planned resort requires a site-specific amendment of the  Comprehensive Plan  Land Use Map to a Master Planned Resort land use designation, pursuant to the requirements of SCC  14.08.020 ; provided, that the subarea planning process authorized under Chapter 14 of the  Comprehensive Plan  (Community Development Plans) and SCC  14.08.060  may be used if deemed appropriate by both the  applicant  and the County. The  Comprehensive Plan amendment  or subarea plan must be processed by the County concurrent with the review of the resort master plan and may be processed by the County concurrent with a development agreement addressing subsequent development within the master planned resort. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.065)

        14.56.070  SEPA environmental review.

              SEPA  environmental review will not be performed for MPR  application  unless or until the  application  is docketed for further consideration by the Board of County Commissioners pursuant to SCC  14.08.040 . All master planned resort  applications  that are docketed for further consideration must comply with the  SEPA  environmental review requirements of SCC  14.08.050 , SCC Chapter  16.12 , and RCW Chapter  43.21C .  SEPA  review must include an evaluation of all of the probable significant adverse environmental impacts from the entire proposal, even if the proposal is to be developed in phases, and these impacts must be considered in determining whether any particular location is suitable for a master planned resort. The  applicant  must be solely responsible for the cost of preparing all necessary environmental studies and documentation (i.e., draft and final environmental impact statements, if applicable), as well as all costs associated with Skagit County’s review of required documentation. If deemed appropriate by the  applicant  and the County, a master planned resort project may be designated by the County as a planned action pursuant to the provisions of RCW  43.21C.031  and WAC  197-11-164  and  197-11-168 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.100. Formerly 14.20.070)

        14.56.080  Project permit.

             In addition to the approval of a resort master plan, new development within a master planned resort requires approval of a development agreement pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.53 , Development Agreements. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.080)

        14.56.090  Modifications and amendments to adopted master plans.

             Modifications to an approved master plan may be considered according to the following standards:

             (1)    Minor Modifications. Minor modifications include minor changes to the timing of approved development, minor shifting of the location of  buildings , proposed  streets , public or private ways, sewer or water facilities, parking areas, landscaping,  parks  and  open space , or similar improvements. Minor modifications to a master plan are subject to a Type 2 review per SCC  14.06.150 .

             (2)    Major Modifications. All other modifications to an adopted master plan, including, but not necessarily limited to, new uses not previously authorized in the master plan or a need for different or expanded facilities, must be considered as major modifications and require an amendment to the master plan subject to a Type 3 review per SCC  14.06.150 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.090)

        14.56.100  New master plan for an existing resort.

             An existing resort which desires an MPR designation and meets the requirements of an existing master planned resort as authorized in RCW  36.70A.362  must submit a master plan meeting the requirements of this Section to the County consistent with the requirements of this Code. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.100)

        14.56.110  Decision-making authority.

             (1)    An  application  for an MPR development agreement is subject to the type of review specified in SCC  14.06.150 .

             (2)    The Planning Commission, pursuant to its authority specified under SCC  14.08.080 , must hear and make recommendations on resort master plans and site-specific  applications  for MPR land use designations on the  Comprehensive Plan  Land Use Map.

             (3)    The Board of County Commissioners, pursuant to its authority specified under SCC Chapter  14.06 , SCC  14.08.090 ,  14.53.040  and this Section, must approve or deny resort master plans, designate new master planned resort land use districts on the  Comprehensive Plan  Land Use Map and approve or deny the uses, densities, conditions and standards authorized for site-specific MPRs in a development agreement. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.110)

        14.56.120  Criteria for approval.

             An  application  for a  Comprehensive Plan  Land Use Map amendment may be approved or denied at the sole discretion of the Board of County Commissioners. The resort master plan (including proposed modifications to an approved resort master plan), special use permit, or development agreement to develop any parcel or parcels of land as an MPR may be approved, or approved with modifications, if it meets all of the criteria below. If no reasonable conditions or modifications can be imposed to ensure that the  application  meets these criteria, then the  application  must be denied.

             (1)    The master plan is consistent with the County’s  development regulations  established for  critical areas  (SCC Chapter  14.24 ), and consistent with lawfully established vested rights, and approved  project permits .

             (2)    The MPR is consistent with the goals and policies of the  Comprehensive Plan , including, but not limited to, the provisions relating to the siting of master planned resorts and the requirements of the County  Shoreline Master Program , and complies with all other applicable sections of this Code and all other applicable codes and policies of the County, including consistency with lawfully established vested rights.

             (3)    All standards established by SCC  14.56.040  are or will be met.

             (4)    The economic/fiscal impact analysis of the proposed MPR demonstrates that:

             (a)    The necessary financial resources are available for the  applicant  to undertake the development and that the developer has or can reasonably obtain adequate financial support for the development once approved.

             (b)    The MPR will provide a financial contribution that positively benefits the local economy throughout the life of the project, considering changes in employment, demands for new or increased levels of public service and the effects of loss of resource lands.

             (c)    The natural amenities of the site, considered together with the proposed recreational activities and facilities to be provided by the resort, constitute the primary attraction to visitors.

             (5)    If an MPR will be phased, each phase contains adequate infrastructure,  open space , recreational facilities, supporting commercial uses, landscaping and all other conditions of the MPR sufficient to stand alone if no subsequent phases are developed.

             (6)    The MPR will provide active recreational uses, adequate  open space , and sufficient services such as transportation access, public safety, and utilities to adequately meet the needs of the guests and residents of the MPR.

             (7)    The MPR will contain within the development the necessary supportive and accessory on-site commercial and other services, and such services must be oriented to serve the MPR and be incidental to the resort itself.

             (8)    Environmental considerations are employed in the design, placement, and screening of facilities and amenities so that all uses within the MPR are harmonious with each other and incorporate and retain, as much as feasible, the preservation of natural features and amenities,  historic sites , and public views.

             (9)    On-site and off-site infrastructure (e.g., electrical power, water, sanitary sewer and  stormwater  treatment) and service (e.g., police, fire protection, emergency medical service and  solid waste  collection) impacts have been fully considered and mitigated.

             (10)    Improvements and activities are located and designed in such a manner as to avoid or minimize adverse effects of the MPR on surrounding lands and property. If located in a rural setting, the MPR is of sufficient size, layout and design, including incorporation of sufficient  setbacks  and landscaping, to appropriately screen the resort development and its impacts from the immediately adjacent rural parcels outside the MPR. Furthermore, the proposed development will not force a significant change in accepted  farm  or  forest practices  or significantly increase the cost of accepted  farm  or  forest practices  on surrounding lands devoted to  farm  or forest use.

             (11)    The siting of the master planned resort will not cause the need to construct additional traffic lanes on State routes through Rural or Natural Resource designated areas, except in the immediate vicinity or within the boundaries of the master planned resort where necessary to accommodate increased traffic and turning movements to various venues within the resort.

             (12)    If the MPR is proposed to be located on designated forest or  mineral  lands of  long-term commercial significance , the land proposed for the master planned resort is better suited and has more long-term importance as an MPR than for the commercial harvesting of  timber  or the commercial extraction of  minerals , and the MPR will not adversely affect adjacent natural resource land production.

             (13)    The adopted  Comprehensive Plan  and  development regulations  preclude new urban or suburban land uses in the vicinity of the MPR. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.120)

        14.56.130  Time limits for approved developments.

             Time limits for the commencement of development within MPRs must be specified in the development agreement per SCC Chapter  14.53 . (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Exh. 2); Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110002 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. O2005009 (part). Formerly 14.20.130)