Chapter 14.24 CRITICAL AREAS ORDINANCE*

         Chapter 14.24
CRITICAL AREAS ORDINANCE*

             Sections:

              14.24.010    Introduction.

              14.24.020    Title and purpose.

              14.24.030    Authority.

              14.24.040    Applicability, jurisdiction and coordination.

              14.24.050    Resource information and maps.

              14.24.060    Authorizations required—Development permits.

              14.24.070    Activities allowed without standard review.

              14.24.080    Standard critical areas review and site assessment procedures.

              14.24.090    Protected critical areas (PCA) requirements.

              14.24.100    Critical areas determination, authorization, and conditions of approval.

              14.24.110     Repealed.

              14.24.120    Ongoing agriculture.

              14.24.130    Hazard tree removal.

              14.24.140    Reasonable use exception.

              14.24.150    Variances.

              14.24.160     Repealed.

              14.24.170    Incentives.

              14.24.200    Wetland designations.

              14.24.210    Wetland classification.

              14.24.220    Wetland report requirements.

              14.24.230    Wetland protection standards.

              14.24.240    Wetland performance-based buffer alternatives and mitigation standards.

              14.24.250    Wetland alternative compensation projects.

              14.24.300    Critical aquifer recharge areas (CARA) intent.

              14.24.310    Critical aquifer recharge areas designations.

              14.24.320    Critical aquifer recharge area standards.

              14.24.330    Critical aquifer recharge areas site assessment requirements.

              14.24.340    Critical aquifer recharge area protection plans.

              14.24.350    Instream-flow rules.

              14.24.360     Repealed.

              14.24.370     Repealed.

              14.24.380    Seawater intrusion areas.

              14.24.400    Geologically hazardous areas designations.

              14.24.410    Geologically hazardous areas known or suspected risk.

              14.24.420    Geologically hazardous areas site assessment requirements.

              14.24.430    Geologically hazardous area mitigation standards.

              14.24.500    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area designations.

              14.24.510    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area water type classification.

              14.24.520    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area site assessment requirements.

              14.24.530    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area protection standards.

              14.24.540    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area performance-based buffer alternatives and mitigation standards.

              14.24.600    Frequently flooded areas designations.

              14.24.610    Frequently flooded areas initial project review.

              14.24.620    Frequently flooded areas development requirements.

              14.24.630    Frequently flooded areas protection standards.

              14.24.700    Compliance tracking.

              14.24.710     Repealed.

              14.24.720    Director.

              14.24.730    Appeals from the Director.

              14.24.740    Interdisciplinary team.

             *    Prior legislation: Ordinances 17938 (Attch. F.), 18069 Appx. A, R20020135, O20020007, O20030020, O20040011 and O20070009.

        14.24.010  Introduction.

             (1)    The ordinance codified in this Chapter was developed under the directives of the Growth Management Act to designate and protect  critical areas .

             (a)    “ Critical areas ” are  wetlands ,  critical aquifer recharge areas ,  frequently flooded areas ,  geologically hazardous areas , and  fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas .

             (b)     Critical areas  regulations are designed to protect the public from threats to human safety, to protect the environment and enhance quality of life, and to preserve environmentally sensitive areas that provide ecological functions valuable to the public.

             (2)     Critical areas  are dynamic natural systems that are a part of Skagit County’s changing landscape.  Critical areas  are designated, classified, and assigned protections using scientifically based criteria. Critical area reports commonly rely on agency issued maps and site-specific studies. The use of critical area reports conducted by a  qualified professional  is central to the management approach developed under this Chapter.

             (3)    This Chapter authorizes the staff of Planning and Development Services to conduct site inspections, preliminary reviews, and pre-application meetings to assist in the identification of  critical areas  and to condition development permits, approvals, and compliance actions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. In the event that hardships and grievances occur, this Chapter provides reasonable use exceptions,  variances , and  appeals . Skagit County will work with the landowner in the management of  critical areas . (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.020  Title and purpose.

             (1)    This Chapter shall be known as the Skagit County  Critical Areas  Ordinance, and is adopted to assist in conserving the value of property, safeguarding the public welfare, ensuring no net loss of ecological functions and providing protection for the following critical areas:

             (2)    Types of  Critical Areas .

             (a)     Wetlands .  Wetlands  serve many important ecological and environmental functions and help to protect public health, safety and welfare by providing flood storage and conveyance and erosion control, while also providing fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, water quality protection, water storage, education, scientific research opportunities and other public benefits. It is the purpose of this Chapter to protect these  functions and values .

             (b)     Frequently Flooded Areas . The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas according to the provisions established under SCC Chapter  14.34  (Flood Damage Prevention).

             (c)     Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas . Potable water is an essential life-sustaining element. Much of Skagit County’s drinking water comes from  groundwater  supplies, which also provide base flows to protect aquatic resources, including fish habitat. Once  groundwater  is contaminated or depleted, it is difficult, costly, and sometimes impossible to clean up or to recharge. It is the purpose of this Chapter to prevent contamination and depletion of  groundwater , and to avoid exorbitant cleanup costs, hardships and potential physical harm to people and aquatic resources.

             (d)     Geologically Hazardous Areas .  Geologically hazardous areas  include areas susceptible to the effects of erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geologic events. They pose a threat to the health and safety of citizens when incompatible residential, commercial, industrial, or infrastructure development is sited or when land disturbing activities occur in areas of a hazard. It is the purpose of this Chapter to protect life, property, and resources.  Steep slopes  are destabilized by inappropriate activities and development or when  structures  or facilities are sited in areas susceptible to natural or human-caused geologic events. Some geologic hazards can be reduced or mitigated by engineering, design, or modified construction practices so that risks to health and safety are acceptable. When technology cannot reduce risks to acceptable levels,  building  and other construction within identified  geologically hazardous areas  will be prohibited.

             (e)     Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas . In addition to their intrinsic value, certain species of fish and wildlife represent important historic, cultural, recreational and economic resources. It is the purpose of this Chapter to protect fish and wildlife populations and their associated habitats and provide special consideration to conservation or protection measures necessary to preserve or enhance anadromous species. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.030  Authority.

             The ordinance codified in this Chapter is adopted under the authority of Chapters  36.70  and  36.70A  RCW, and Article 11 of the Washington State Constitution. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.040  Applicability, jurisdiction and coordination.

             (1)    Applicability. This Chapter applies to all land uses and developments taking place within the geographical areas that meet the definitions and criteria for  critical areas  regulation as set forth in this Chapter.

             (2)    Relationship to Other Regulations.

             (a)    If other provisions of Skagit County Code conflict with this chapter, or if provisions of this chapter conflict, the more protective provision applies unless the Code specifically provides otherwise.

             (b)    Nothing in these regulations eliminates or otherwise affects the responsibility of an  applicant  or  property owner  to comply with all other applicable local, State, and Federal regulations and permits that may be required.

             (3)    Relationship to other Federal, State, Tribal, and Local Jurisdictional Agencies’ Regulations. Many State, Federal, and other regulations apply to land use and development within  critical areas .  Applicants  and landowners are responsible for complying with all applicable local, State, and Federal regulations and permit requirements, apart from the process established in this Chapter.

             (4)    Jurisdictional Substitution. If another agency possesses jurisdiction over activities within  critical areas  and the other agency’s permit conditions or other legal requirements satisfy the requirements of this Chapter, the  applicant  may request those requirements substitute for the requirements of this Chapter.

             (a)    The request for substitution must be made in writing and include the other agency’s permit conditions or other legal requirements that satisfy the requirements of this Chapter.

             (b)    If the  Director  approves the request for jurisdictional substitution, the other agency’s requirements will be a condition of  critical areas  approval and be enforceable by the County.

             (c)    Agencies whose permit conditions and other legal requirements may satisfy the requirements of this chapter include: the United States Army Corps of Engineers, Environmental Protection Agency, and Fish and Wildlife Service; local Tribes; and the Washington State  Department  of  Ecology ,  Department  of Natural Resources and  Department  of Fish and Wildlife.

             (5)    Jurisdictional Coordination. In addition to the provisions established in this Chapter, the County will coordinate its own programs with those of other public and private organizations to enhance management of  critical areas  in Skagit County. Coordination may apply to development  applications , code enforcement, and emergencies. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.050  Resource information and maps.

             (1)    With the exception of the flood insurance rate map used to designate certain  frequently flooded areas ,  wellhead protection area  maps maintained by Washington State  Department  of Health, sole source  aquifers  designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and the Skagit County Final Shoreline Area Designation Map (5/83 or as revised), Skagit County’s  critical areas  maps are provided only as a general guide to alert the user to the possible distribution, location, and extent of  critical areas . Map identification of  critical areas  provides only approximate boundaries and locations in Skagit County. The actual locations and boundaries of  critical areas , as well as their quality and quantity, must be based upon the presence of the features applicable to each  critical areas  element in this Chapter. Maps will not be considered a regulatory standard or substitute for site-specific assessments. The controlling factor in determining the actual presence and extent of  critical areas  is the  application  of definitions, methodologies, and  performance standards  under the  critical areas  report requirements provided in this Chapter.

             (2)    Skagit County will utilize data from natural resource agencies as a source of  best available science  when reviewing sites and  critical areas  reports. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.060  Authorizations required—Development permits.

             (1)    Authorization Required.

             (a)    The  Director ’s written authorization is required for any land use or development activity that can impair the  functions and values  of  critical areas  or their  buffers , including suspect or known  geologically hazardous areas .

             (b)    Impairment of the  functions and values  of  critical areas  or their  buffers  can occur by disturbance of the soil or water, by removal of, or damage to, existing vegetation, or any other action creating an impact to a critical area or its  buffer .

             (c)    The landowner, or designee, who conducts or proposes to undertake land use or development activities that can adversely impact  critical areas  or their  buffers  must obtain County authorization prior to commencing such activities.

             (2)     Application  for Authorization.  Applications  for authorization must include:

             (a)    A description of the proposed activity;

             (b)    A  site plan  showing the location of the proposed activity and associated area of disturbance in relation to all known  critical areas  or  critical areas  indicators; and

             (c)    If any previous critical area studies have been conducted on the property, (i) copies of the studies and any decisions of the County related to  critical areas , or (ii) the County’s  application  number associated with the  critical areas  review.

             (3)    Relationship to Development Permits.

             (a)    Authorizations required under this Chapter overlay other permit and approval requirements of the Skagit County Code.

             (b)    If a County development permit or approval is not required for a land use or development activity that can impair the  functions and values  of  critical areas  or their  buffers , this activity must comply with the substantive and procedural requirements of this Chapter.

             (c)     Critical areas  review pursuant to this Chapter must be conducted prior to or during review of a development  application .

             (d)    No land use development permit,  land division ,  development approval , or other County authorization required by County ordinance will be granted until the  applicant  has obtained authorization under this Chapter or otherwise demonstrated compliance with any applicable provisions of this Chapter.

             (4)    Conflicts With Other Provisions. If any provision of this Chapter conflicts with any other applicable provision of the Skagit County Code, the more restrictive provision will apply unless specifically excepted in this Chapter.

             (5)     SEPA  Compliance. The goals, policies and purposes set forth in this Chapter will be considered policies of Skagit County under the State Environmental Policy Act. When applicable the  applicant  must meet  SEPA  requirements pursuant to SCC Chapter  16.12 .

             (6)    Other Permits Required. Other  City , County, State, and/or Federal permit conditions may apply to the proposed action, and that compliance with the provisions of this Chapter may not necessarily constitute compliance with other such requirements. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.070  Activities allowed without standard review.

             (1)    The developments, land use activities, and associated uses listed below in Subsection (2) of this Section are allowed without standard  critical areas  review.

             (a)    Developments and land use activities allowed without standard review must:

             (i)    Be conducted in a manner that recognizes the risk to, and causes the least impact to,  critical areas  and their  buffers ; and

             (ii)    Be consistent with other applicable provisions of this Chapter and other chapters of the Skagit County Code.

             (b)    Developments and land use activities allowed without standard review are not permitted to damage a critical area.

             (c)    If any damage is caused to a critical area or  buffer  in connection with such activity, the critical area and its  buffer  must be restored to the extent feasible. The  applicant  and/or landowner is responsible for notifying the  Director  if any damage occurs and must provide all necessary  restoration  or mitigation.

             (d)    Developments and land use activities allowed without standard review may require a floodplain development permit if within the special flood hazard area (SFHA), and therefore may require a habitat impact assessment pursuant to SCC  14.34.220 .

             (2)    Developments and Land Use Activities Allowed Without Standard Review.

             (a)    Emergencies That Threaten Public Health, Safety and Welfare.

             (i)    Developments and land use activities required to respond to an emergency that threatens public health, safety, and welfare is allowed without standard review.

             (ii)    An “emergency” is an unanticipated and imminent threat to the public health or safety or to the environment which requires immediate action within a period of time too short to allow full compliance with this Chapter.

             (iii)    Emergency actions that create an impact to a critical area or its  buffer  must use reasonable methods that can address the emergency but also that have the least possible impact to the critical area or its  buffer .

             (iv)    The  person  or agency undertaking such action must restore the critical area and  buffer  after the emergency to the extent feasible.

             (v)    The  person  or agency undertaking such action must notify the  Director  within one working day or as soon as practical following commencement of the emergency activity.

             (A)    Following such notification, the  Director  will determine if the action taken was within the scope of the emergency actions allowed in this Subsection.

             (B)    If the  Director  determines that the action taken or any part of the action taken was beyond the scope of allowed emergency actions, then the enforcement provisions of SCC Chapter  14.09  (Enforcement Procedures) will apply.

             (b)    Existing Agricultural Activities.

             (i)    Existing activities defined as  ongoing agriculture  on designated agricultural land, including related existing development and activities which do not result in expansion into a critical area or its  buffer  and which do not result in significant adverse impacts to a critical area or its  buffer ; provided, that such activities comply with the provisions of SCC  14.24.120 .

             (ii)    New development and/or expansion of existing agricultural operations must comply with both the substantive and procedural provisions of this Chapter. Existing and ongoing agricultural activities that result in significant adverse impacts to a critical area or its  buffer  will not be allowed without standard review under this Chapter.

             (c)    Maintenance and  Repair .

             (i)    Normal and routine maintenance or  repair  of existing  structures , utilities, sewage disposal systems, potable water systems,  drainage facilities , detention/retention  ponds , or public and  private roads  and  driveways  associated with pre-existing residential or commercial development, provided any maintenance or  repair  activities must use  best management practices  (BMPs) with the least amount of potential impact to the  critical areas  and any impact to a critical area or its  buffer  must be restored after the maintenance to the extent feasible.

             (ii)    Normal maintenance,  repair , or operation of existing  structures , facilities, and improved areas accessory to a single-family residential use established prior to June 13, 1996, or otherwise established in accordance with this Chapter, provided any maintenance or  repair  activities must use reasonable methods with the least amount of potential impact to the  critical areas  and any impact to a critical area or its  buffer  must be restored after the maintenance to the extent feasible. This allowance must not be construed as applying to agricultural activities undertaken outside of the Agriculture-NRL or Rural Resource-NRL zoning districts.

             (d)    Modification of  Structure .

             (i)    Modification of an existing single-family residence that does not change the use from residential, does not expand the  building footprint , does not increase septic effluent, and does not adversely impact  critical areas  or their  buffers . This allowance does not apply to the  replacement  of a single-family residence.

             (ii)    Modification of an existing  structure  other than a single-family residence which does not expand the  building footprint , alter the use or increase septic effluent, pursuant to the requirements of the  nonconforming  use and  structure  provisions in SCC Chapter  14.16 , and does not adversely impact  critical areas  or their  buffers . This allowance does not apply to  replacement  of an existing  structure , nor does it exclude review for compliance with CARA requirements as changes of use may include risks to  groundwater  contamination.

             (e)    Operation and Maintenance of Public and Private  Diking and Drainage Systems .

             (i)    This exemption applies to the lawful operation and maintenance of public and private  diking and drainage systems  which protect life and property along the Skagit and Samish Rivers and delta  agriculture  in Skagit County.

             (ii)    This exemption does not apply to public or private activities that expand the levee,  dike , or drain beyond its design characteristics as of June 1, 1999, the time of adoption of this Subsection; nor activities that expand or create new facilities.

             (f)    Research. Education and scientific research activities which do not adversely impact  critical areas  or their  buffers . In every case,  critical areas  impacts must be minimized and disturbed areas must be immediately restored.

             (g)    Site Investigations. Site investigation work necessary for land use  applications  such as surveys, soil logs and other related activities which does not adversely impact  critical areas  or their  buffers . In every case,  critical areas  impacts must be minimized and disturbed areas must be immediately restored.

             (h)     Artificial Watercourses  for Irrigation and  Drainage . Activities in or adjacent to  watercourses  which were constructed and are actively maintained for irrigation and  drainage  by  diking ,  drainage , and irrigation improvement districts formed pursuant to RCW Title  85 ; provided, that any activity must comply with relevant State and Federal regulations.

             (i)    Landscaping. Maintenance activities, such as mowing and normal pruning; provided, that such maintenance activities are limited to existing landscaping improvements established prior to June 13, 1996, or otherwise established in accordance with this Chapter, and do not expand into  critical areas  or associated  buffers , do not expose soils, do not alter topography, do not destroy or clear  native vegetation , and do not diminish water quality or quantity. This allowance must not be construed as applying to agricultural activities undertaken outside the Agriculture-NRL or Rural Resource-NRL zoning districts.

             (j)    Nature  Enhancement .

             (i)    Fish, wildlife,  wetland  and/or riparian  buffer  enhancement activities not required as mitigation, such as native plant and mulch installation and/or reasonable removal of nonnative vegetation, provided all of the following apply:

             (A)    The project is consistent with this Chapter and does not harm  critical areas  or their  buffers ;

             (B)    The  subject property  is not located in a high  landslide  hazard area; and

             (C)    New or expanded  buffer  enhancement activities that require heavy equipment or instream work require notification of the  enhancement  activities to be submitted to the  Director .

             (ii)    Fish, wildlife,  wetland  and/or riparian  buffer  enhancement activities not required as mitigation and specifically approved by the U.S.  Department  of Fish and Wildlife, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Washington State  Department  of Fish and Wildlife or the Washington State  Department  of  Ecology . (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110013 Attch. A (part); Ord. O20110008 (part): Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.080  Standard critical areas review and site assessment procedures.

             (1)    Determination That an Activity Requires Standard Review. All  applications  for approval of activities requiring written authorization pursuant to SCC  14.24.060  will require standard  critical areas  review. If not otherwise required, all  applications  for  critical areas  review must include a description of the proposed activity and a  site plan  showing the location of the proposed activity and associated area of disturbance in relation to all known  critical areas  or  critical areas  indicators. Upon receipt of the  application , the  Director  will determine whether the proposed activity fits within any of the activities allowed without standard review found in SCC  14.24.070 . If the proposed activity is so allowed and meets the associated conditions for such an allowance, no further  critical areas  review will be required, except as necessary for the  Director  to ensure that any conditions for such an allowance are met in practice. The  Director  must note this determination in the  application  file and provide written authorization for the project or activity to proceed as proposed in the  application  when undertaken in accordance with any conditions for such an allowance.

             (2)    Review Procedures.

             (a)    Standard review is required if:

             (i)    A critical area or its  buffer  is present and the land use or development activity could impair the  functions and values  of the critical area or its  buffers ;

             (ii)    The activity is not allowed without standard review under SCC  14.24.070 .

             (b)    When standard review is not required. If the  Director  determines that the proposed activity is allowed without standard review, then:

             (i)    No further  critical areas  review will be required, except as necessary for the  Director  to ensure that any conditions for such an allowance are met in practice.

             (ii)    The  Director  must note the determination in the  application  file and provide written authorization for the project or activity to proceed as proposed in the  application  when undertaken in accordance with any conditions for such an allowance.

             (c)    If the proposed activity requires standard review, the  Director  must determine whether  critical areas  or their  buffers  are present and may be affected by the proposed activity.

             (i)     Critical areas  or their  buffers  are present if either is within 300 feet, or a  distance  otherwise specified in this Chapter, from the proposed activity or may be affected by the proposed activity.

             (ii)    To determine if  critical areas  or their  buffers  are present, the  Director  will:

             (A)    Review the  critical areas  application together with the publicly available maps and other  critical areas  resources identified in the relevant sections of this Chapter; and

             (B)    Complete the  critical areas  staff checklist; and

             (C)    Inspect the site; and

             (D)    Complete the  critical areas  inspection checklist.

             (3)    Determination That  Critical Areas  Are Not Present or Affected.

             (a)    If the  Director  determines that  critical areas  or  critical area buffers  are not present within 300 feet of the proposed activity or within a  distance  otherwise specified in this Chapter; or

             (b)    The project is a  subdivision  pursuant to SCC  14.76.200  that does not include additional development as defined under SCC  14.04.020 ;

             (i)    All subsequent development on the segregated home site and/or remainder parcel will require complete standard  critical areas  review pursuant to this Chapter; or

             (c)    The project does not expand an existing single-family residence by more than 200 square feet of  floor area , does not adversely impact and is not located closer to  critical areas  or their  buffers , and does not alter the use or increase septic effluent; or

             (d)    The project does not expand an existing  structure , other than a single-family residence, by more than 200 square feet of  floor area , does not alter the use or increase septic effluent, pursuant to the  nonconforming  use and  structure  provisions of Chapter  14.16  SCC, and does not adversely impact or encroach into  critical areas  or their  buffers ; then

             (e)    The review required pursuant to this Chapter is complete.

             (f)    The  Director  will ensure that the proposed activity is undertaken as described in the  application  and as shown on the  site plan . The determination will be noted in the  application  file and written authorization will be provided. This determination does not constitute approval of any use or activity nor its compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, outside the scope of that stated in the  application . Any proposed change in use or scope of activity from that contained in the  application  will be subject to further review under this Chapter.

             (4)    Determination That  Critical Areas  Are Present or Affected.

             (a)    Either prior to or during review of a development  application , the  Director  will make an initial assessment based on a site inspection and other information as to whether:

             (i)     Wetland  indicators are present within 300 feet of the proposed development. If a site inspection does not indicate the presence of  wetland  indicators on the  subject property  or within 300 feet of the  subject property , no additional  wetland  assessment will be required.

             (ii)    Any other critical area type described in SCC  14.24.020  is present within 200 feet of the proposed development. If a site inspection does not indicate a critical area on or within 200 feet of the  subject property , no additional critical area assessment will be required.

             (iii)    A project site is within the special flood hazard area, and a regulated  watercourse  is within 250 feet of the  subject property .

             (b)    If the  Director  determines that critical area indicators are present within 200 feet of the proposed activity or within a  distance  otherwise specified in this Chapter, then the  Director  will note this determination in the  application  file and the  applicant  will be required to provide the  critical areas  report specified in this Chapter.

             (5)    Critical Area Report.

             (a)    Preparation of a critical area report may precede a County  site visit ; provided, that no disturbance of vegetation or land surface occurs prior to County authorization. If the  applicant  chooses, the  site assessment  may be limited to 300 feet surrounding a proposed development only if there are no other relevant activities occurring or proposed on the remainder of the parcel which are relevant to this Chapter.

             (b)    If the  applicant , together with assistance from the  Director , cannot obtain permission for access to properties within 300 feet of the  project area , then the  site assessment  will estimate off-site  critical areas  and potential on-site  buffer  encumbrances.

             (c)    The critical area report must be completed as follows:

             (i)    The  site assessment  must be prepared by a  qualified professional  for the type of critical area or areas involved and must contain the information specified for each type of critical area. The  qualified professional  may consult with the  Director  prior to or during preparation of the  site assessment  to obtain County approval of modifications to the contents of the  critical areas  report.

             (ii)    The  site assessment  must use scientifically valid methods and studies in the analysis of  critical areas  data and field reconnaissance and reference the source of science used.

             (iii)    The  critical areas  report must include:

             (A)    Project description that includes a detailed narrative describing the project or  land disturbing activity , its relationship to the critical area and its potential  temporary  and permanent impacts to  critical areas  and other relevant information; and

             (B)    A copy of the  site plan  for the project proposal including a map to scale depicting  critical areas ,  buffers , the  development proposal , and any areas where land disturbance, including  clearing  and  grading  is proposed; and

             (C)    Identification and characterization of all  critical areas  and  buffers  within the specified area of review; and

             (D)    An assessment of the probable direct and indirect impacts to the critical area(s) and buffer(s) resulting from the proposed development; and an assessment of the cumulative impacts to the critical area resulting from the existing and proposed development; and

             (E)    A conceptual description of the proposed  stormwater  management plan for the development and consideration of impacts to  drainage  alterations; and

             (F)    A detailed analysis demonstrating the proposal meets mitigation sequencing requirements pursuant to Subsection (6) of this Section; and

             (G)    If necessary, a proposed  compensatory mitigation  plan including estimated cost for financial assurance, land use restrictions and landowner management, maintenance and monitoring responsibilities; and

             (H)    Regulatory analysis including a discussion of any Federal, State, Tribal, and/or local requirements, including but not limited to the Shoreline Management Master Program, or special management recommendations which have been developed for species and/or habitats located on the site;

             (I)    Designate a maintenance corridor to provide an area for construction and maintenance of  buildings  and other  structures . The standard width of the maintenance corridor is 15 feet;

             (J)    If necessary, a critical  aquifer  recharge area protection plan.

             (d)    If necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter, the  Director  may require additional information from the  applicant , separate from the  critical areas  report.

             (6)    Mitigation Sequencing Requirement.

             (a)    The sequence of mitigation is defined below:

             (i)    Avoid the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

             (ii)    Minimize the impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

             (iii)    Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected environment to the conditions existing at the time of the initiation of the project or activity;

             (iv)    Reduce or eliminate the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;

             (v)    Compensate for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments;

             (vi)    Monitor required compensation and take remedial or corrective measure when necessary.

             (7)    General Mitigation Requirements.

             (a)    Mitigation. All proposed alterations to  critical areas  or associated  buffers  require  compensatory mitigation  sufficient to provide for and maintain the  functions and values  of the critical area or to prevent risk from a  critical areas  hazard and must give adequate consideration to the reasonable and economically viable use of the property.

             (8)    Financial Assurance. The  Director  will require the mitigation proposed in the  critical areas  report to be completed prior to final approval of the development permit. For all projects with an estimated mitigation cost of $10,000 or more, the  Director  will require financial assurance which will guarantee compliance with the  mitigation plan  if the mitigation proposed in the  critical areas  report cannot be completed prior to final approval of the development permit. Financial assurance must be in the form of either a surety  bond , performance  bond , assignment of savings account or an irrevocable letter of credit guaranteed by an acceptable financial institution with terms and conditions acceptable to the County Prosecuting Attorney, must be in the amount of 125 percent of the estimated cost of the uncompleted actions or construction, and must be assigned in favor of Skagit County Planning and Development Services. The term of the financial assurance must remain in place until the required mitigation is complete. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20230001 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.090  Protected critical areas (PCA) requirements.

             (1)     PCA . Approval of projects which trigger a development permit and/or other land use activities that require  critical areas  report(s) require the identification and designation of  PCAs .  PCAs  must include all  critical areas  and their associated  buffers  as well as all areas on the parcel not investigated for  critical areas .  PCAs  must be depicted on a  site plan , suitable for recording, and include all  critical areas  and associated  buffers  which have been identified through the  critical areas  report process. The designation of  PCAs  does not exclude sites from additional or updated assessment following the requirements established by this Chapter.

             (a)    Except for the allowances under SCC  14.24.070 (2)(j), the  PCA  must be left undisturbed in its natural state. No  clearing , mowing,  grading , filling, logging, or removal of woody material;  building ; construction or  road  construction of any kind; planting of nonnative vegetation or occupation by livestock is allowed within the  PCA  areas except as specifically permitted by Skagit County on a case-by-case basis.

             (2)     PCA  Field Identification and  Buffer  Edge Markers.

             (a)     Temporary  Markers. During construction phases of development, distinct  temporary  marking consisting of flagging and/or staking must be maintained along the outer limits of the delineated  PCA  or the limits of the proposed site disturbance outside of the  PCA . Prior to the start of construction activity, and as necessary during construction,  temporary  markings will be inspected by the  Director  or  qualified professional . Written confirmation is to be included in the record as to whether or not the flagging has been installed consistent with the permit requirements prior to commencement of the permitted activity.

             (b)    Permanent  Buffer  Edge Markers. Except as provided under Subsection (2)(b)(i) of this Section, the outer edges of all  PCAs , with the exception of  critical aquifer recharge areas , must be clearly marked on site by the  applicant  or landowner with permanent stakes and  critical areas  markers.  Critical areas  markers must be County-approved  critical areas  signs. Installation of permanent markers is the responsibility of the landowner.

             (i)    The  Director  may waive or modify the requirement for permanent  buffer  edge markers; provided, that any such decision will be based on a site-specific determination that future verification of  PCA  locations will not be substantially more difficult without the placement of permanent markers and that such waiver or modification will not result in reduced long-term protection of  critical areas .

             (ii)    Permanent markers must be placed to locate the edge of the  PCA . The permanent markers must be placed every 50 feet along the  buffer  edge, or one per  lot , whichever is greater. The spacing intervals of the markers must be such as to provide comparable accuracy of line-of-sight determination of  buffer  edges. The locations of all required markers or  fences  must be shown on the plat map or  site plan  recorded with the Auditor.

             (c)     Signs  or Fencing Required as Part of Critical Area Mitigation. The  Director  will require permanent  signs  or fencing where the  Director  determines that it is a necessary component of a  mitigation plan . The intent is to provide clear and sufficient notice, identification, and protection of  critical areas  on site where damage to a critical area or  buffer  by humans or livestock is probable due to the proximity of the adjacent activity.

             (d)     Sign , Marker and  Fence  Maintenance. It is the responsibility of the landowner, or any subsequent landowner, to maintain the required  PCA  markers,  signs  or  fences  in working order throughout the duration of the development project or land use activity. “Maintenance” includes any necessary  replacement . Removal of required  signs , markers or  fences  without prior written approval of the  Director  is considered a violation of this Chapter.

             (3)     PCA  Recording and Binding Agreements.

             (a)    All  PCAs  must be recorded with the County Auditor in accordance with the procedures established under this Section. The  applicant  is responsible for all fees and other costs associated with recording of  PCAs .

             (b)    Binding Agreements. For each project or activity that requires recording of  PCAs , the following information must be recorded with the Auditor, using forms provided by Planning and Development Services, as part of a binding agreement between the landowner and the County which will run with the land and be readily available to the public upon request:

             (i)    Binding agreement signed by the landowner and the  Director  which stipulates any special conditions of approval, protective covenants, binding conditions, or other requirements such as use restrictions, required mitigation, and/or landowner maintenance or monitoring requirements established at the time of approval;

             (ii)    Reference to the County file containing the completed CAO review of information pertaining to approval of the project or activity.

             (4)     PCAs  on Pre-Existing  Lots .

             (a)    For  development proposals  and other land use activities on pre-existing  lots , not part of a proposed  land division  or other form of multiple  lot  development,  PCAs  must be identified on a scaled  site plan  showing the location of the  PCA ,  structures  (existing and proposed) and their  distances  from the  PCA  and  lot  lines to show relative location within the subject parcel(s). All  PCAs  must include the necessary labeling to show calculated area (in square feet or acreage), and type or category of critical area designated.

             (b)    Ingress and Egress. Owners of  PCAs  must grant ingress and egress by the  Director  for monitoring and evaluation of compliance with established conditions of approval, binding conditions or any required mitigation.

             (5)     PCA  Designations for New  Land Divisions .

             (a)    For  land divisions  where  critical areas  have been identified through  critical areas  reports, all  PCAs  must be placed into separate tracts or easements, whose uses will be regulated by the provisions of this Chapter. Areas within a  PCA  can be included in the total acreage for development purposes and may be used in  lot  area or density calculations.  PCAs  may be owned and maintained by the owner of the  lot  of which they are a part or transferred to another owner, such as the County, homeowners association, or land trust. See SCC  14.24.170  regarding incentives that may be available for lands designated as  PCAs .

             (b)    If the development project is a  CaRD  application and is within a natural resource land, the remainder parcel must be put into Os-PA or Os-NRL and will have all of the constraints that are set forth in this Chapter.

             (c)    Recording.  PCA  designations must be recorded with the Auditor as part of the plat approval process. The Auditor file number referencing the  PCA  easement must be on the face of the plat and its provisions must run with the land.

             (d)     PCA  Plat Map Descriptions. The location of  PCAs  must be clearly identified on preliminary and final plat maps.  PCAs  must be labeled using the letters A through Z, or another labeling system approved by the  Director . If a survey was not used to map the critical area, a note on the final plat map must be recorded stating that a legal survey was not performed to delineate the critical area and that the surveyor is not incurring liability for the exact boundaries of the critical area on the plat map. All  PCAs  must include the necessary labeling to show calculated area (in square feet or acreage), and type and/or category of  critical areas  within each  lot . This information must be noted on the face of the approved plat.

             (e)     PCA  Maintenance. The  PCA  is to be left undisturbed in its natural state. No  clearing , mowing,  grading , filling, logging, or removal of woody material;  building ; construction or  road  construction of any kind; planting of nonnative vegetation or occupation by livestock is allowed within the  PCA  areas except as specifically permitted by Skagit County on a case-by-case basis.

             (f)    Ingress, Egress and Use. Owners of  PCAs  must grant ingress and egress by the  Director  for monitoring and evaluation of compliance with established conditions of approval, binding conditions or any required mitigation. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20090010 Attch. 1 (part); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.100  Critical areas determination, authorization, and conditions of approval.

             (1)    The  Director  will make a determination of whether to authorize the proposed activity based on  critical areas  reports and other available  critical areas  information, or as otherwise provided by this Code.

             (2)    A determination to authorize a proposal will include designation of  protected critical areas  (PCAs) pursuant to SCC  14.24.090  and stipulation of binding conditions and required protection, mitigation, monitoring, maintenance or other conditions of approval pursuant to this Chapter.

             (a)    If the  Director  determines that there are no conditions under which the proposed activity could be approved, then the  Director  must deny the proposal.

             (b)    Formal determinations made by the  Director  must include the basis and rationale for the determination, as well as detailed specification of related conditions of approval, land use prohibitions, and required landowner mitigation, management, monitoring and/or maintenance.

             (c)    Complete Record. A complete record of all formal determinations by the  Director , along with related  critical areas  reports, binding agreements, conditions of approval, land use prohibitions and required mitigation, must be maintained by the County and made available to the public upon request, pursuant to RCW Chapter  40.14 .

             (d)    Option to Apply for a Reasonable Use Exception. If the strict  application  of this Chapter would deny all reasonable and economically viable use of the property, then the  applicant  may apply for a reasonable use exception pursuant to SCC  14.24.140 .

             (e)    Option to Apply for a  Variance . If the strict  application  of this Chapter would result in an unreasonable and unusual hardship, then the  applicant  may request a  variance  from one or more of the dimensional requirements of this Chapter as described in SCC  14.24.150 .

             (3)    Reopening of Review Process.

             (a)    If at any time prior to completion of the public input process on the associated permit or approval, the  Director  receives new evidence that a critical area or a  critical area buffer  may be present within 300 feet of the  project area  or within a  distance  otherwise specified in this Chapter, then the  Director  will reopen the  critical areas  review process pursuant to this Chapter and will require whatever level of  critical areas  review and mitigation as is required by this Chapter.

             (b)    Once the public input process on the associated permit or approval is completed and the record is closed, then the  Director ’s determination for the permit or approval regarding  critical areas  pursuant to this Chapter must be final, unless appealed as described in SCC  14.24.730 ; provided, however, that the  Director  will not be prevented from reopening the  critical areas  review process if County staff relied on misinformation, site conditions have changed, or if new information is available. Prior to reopening a  critical areas  review under this Subsection, the  Director  must make a  site visit . No  critical areas  review will be reopened for a permit or approval under this Section unless the  Director  determines, after the  site visit , that the  applicant  provided misinformation, site conditions have changed, or if new information is available.

             (c)    If a  critical areas  review for a permit or approval is reopened under this Subsection after a permit or approval is granted, the burden of proof on whether the  applicant  submitted misinformation at the time of the submittal of the checklist will be on the  Director . The fact that the  applicant  no longer owns the  subject property  at the time the  Director  discovers the misinformation, site conditions have changed, or if new information is available will not inhibit reopening  critical areas  review. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.110  County regulation of forest practices for the protection of critical areas.

              Repealed by Ord. O20250011.  (Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110007 Attch. 1 (part); Ord. O20090010 Attch. 1 (part); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.120  Ongoing agriculture.

             (1)    Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Section is to address two mandates under the Growth Management Act (GMA): first, to protect the existing  functions and values  of  fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas  (FWHCAs) in and adjacent to natural, managed  watercourses  with headwaters, and managed  watercourses  without headwaters as defined in SCC  14.04.020  (collectively “ watercourses ”), and second, to conserve and protect agricultural lands of  long-term commercial significance , specifically those lands in ongoing agricultural activity as defined by SCC  14.04.020  that are located adjacent to these  watercourses .

             (a)    For purposes of this Section, “existing  functions and values ” means the following:

             (i)    Water quality standards identified in WAC Chapter  173-201A , including the provisions that account for natural or baseline conditions.

             (ii)    The existing presence or absence of large woody debris within the  watercourse .

             (iii)    The riparian vegetation characteristics and width, including but not limited to the amount of shade provided by the riparian vegetation at the time the VSP was adopted.

             (iv)    The existing channel morphology.

             (b)    Because many of the areas that are the subject of this Section are located in the Skagit and Samish River deltas or floodplains, where substantial  diking  and  drainage  infrastructure have been constructed and where various  diking  and  drainage  districts have lawful obligations to maintain agricultural and other  drainage  functions and infrastructure as established in RCW Titles  85  and  86 , this Section also must accommodate those ongoing  diking ,  drainage , and flood control functions.

             (c)    It is the goal of Skagit County to administer the provisions of this Section consistent with local, State, and Federal programs, statutes and regulations to protect the health, welfare, and safety of the community, to accommodate continued operation and maintenance of the  diking ,  drainage , and flood control infrastructure and to protect  agriculture , natural resources, natural resource industries, and  fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas  in and adjacent to  watercourses . This Section is intended, to the maximum extent possible, to rely on and coordinate with but not substitute for or duplicate other State and Federal programs, statutes, and regulations that address agricultural activities in a manner that protects water quality and fish habitat. This Section is intended to supplement those existing State and Federal programs, statutes, and regulations only in those areas where the County has determined existing programs do not fully address GMA requirements to protect FWHCAs in and adjacent to  watercourses  and to conserve agricultural lands of  long-term commercial significance .

             (d)    Skagit County hereby elects to enroll the entirety of unincorporated Skagit County, and all its  watersheds , in the Voluntary Stewardship

             Program established by Engrossed Substitute House Bill 1886 (2011). Skagit County intends the Voluntary Stewardship Program, in conjunction with the provisions of this Section and Chapter, to protect  critical areas  in areas of agricultural activity.

             (2)    Applicability. Except as may otherwise be required by ESHB 1933, Chapter 321, Laws of 2003, for agricultural lands located within the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Management Act, RCW Chapter  90.58 , this Section will apply to the following:

             (a)    As defined in SCC  14.04.020 , all  ongoing agriculture  (including operation and maintenance of agricultural  drainage  infrastructure) which is located within 200 feet from a  watercourse , or any  ongoing agriculture  (including operations and maintenance of agricultural  drainage  infrastructure) that adversely impacts the existing  functions and values  of a  watercourse  is subject to the requirements of this Section. Isolated,  artificial watercourses  that have no channelized surface hydraulic connection or no piped hydraulic connection between the  artificial watercourse  and any natural or  modified natural watercourse  or any salt water will not be subject to the requirements of this Section.  Drainage  tile used to convey  groundwater  will not be considered a piped hydraulic connection.

             (b)    The provisions of this Section must not be interpreted to permit expansion of  ongoing agriculture  (including agricultural  drainage  infrastructure) into areas that did not meet the definition of  ongoing agriculture  on May 13, 1996, including lands that were fallow on that date but had been in agricultural production within five years prior to that date, unless such expansion can comply with all of the requirements for  critical areas  protection found in this Chapter, including but not limited to the requirement to adhere to the standard  critical areas  buffers and  setbacks .

             (c)    In this Section, the term “ best management practices ” (BMPs) refers to one or all definitions of that term in SCC  14.04.020 , depending on which definition is relevant within the context used.

             (d)    Agricultural operations that do not meet the definition of  ongoing agriculture  are required to comply with the other provisions of this Chapter.

             (3)    No Harm or Degradation Standard.

             (a)    All ongoing agricultural activities must be conducted so as not to cause harm or degradation to the existing  functions and values  of FWHCAs in and adjacent to  watercourses  (the “no harm or degradation” standard). For purposes of this Section, the phrase “no harm or degradation” means the following:

             (i)    Meeting the State water  pollution  control laws; and

             (ii)    Meeting the requirements of any total maximum daily load (TMDL) water quality improvement projects established by the  Department  of  Ecology  (ECY) pursuant to RCW Chapter  90.48 ; and

             (iii)    Meeting all applicable requirements of RCW Chapter  77.55  (Hydraulics Code) and WAC Chapter  220-110  (Hydraulics Code Rules); and

             (iv)    Meeting the specific  watercourse  protection measures for  ongoing agriculture  specified in Subsection (4) of this Section; and

             (v)    No evidence of significant degradation to the existing fish habitat characteristics of the  watercourse  from those characteristics identified in the baseline inventory described in Resolution No. R20040211 that can be directly attributed to the agricultural activities that are described in this Section.

             (b)    The references to RCW Chapters  77.55  and  90.48  and WAC Chapters  173-201A  and  220-110  contained in this Subsection must not be interpreted to replace ECY and the Washington  Department  of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) authority to implement and enforce these State programs with County responsibility to do so, but rather are intended to provide County input and a supplemental County involvement as needed to implement the County’s GMA obligations under this Section.

             (c)    Reserved.

             (d)    An owner or operator is responsible only for those conditions caused by agricultural activities conducted by the owner or operator and is not responsible for conditions that do not meet the requirements of this Subsection resulting from the actions of others or from natural conditions not related to the agricultural operations. In those situations where the County is presented with data showing a violation of a State water quality standard at a particular location, but where the County cannot identify any condition or practice existing or occurring at a particular agricultural operation that is causing the violation, the County will refer the information regarding the State water quality violation to ECY and must follow other procedures described in SCC  14.44.085 . Conditions resulting from unusual weather events (such as a storm in excess of 25-year, 24-hour storm) or other exceptional circumstances that are not the product of obvious neglect are not the responsibility of the owner or operator, but will be subject to the requirements for emergency actions described in SCC  14.24.070 (1).

             (4)    Required  Watercourse  Protection Measures for  Ongoing Agriculture  in  Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas  (FWHCA). Unless the emergency provisions of SCC  14.24.070 (1) apply, the following  watercourse  protection measures are required:

             (a)    Livestock and Dairy Management. Livestock and dairy operations must not contribute any wastes or sediments into a natural or  modified natural watercourse  in violation of adopted State water  pollution  control laws.

             (i)    Livestock access to  watercourses  must be managed consistent with this Subsection. Access to a  watercourse  for livestock watering and/or stream crossings must be limited to only the amount of time necessary for watering and/or crossing a  watercourse . Livestock watering facilities or access must be constructed consistent with applicable NRCS conservation practice standards, and must not be constructed to provide access to agricultural land that does not meet the definition of  ongoing agriculture  unless that agricultural land and the crossing can meet all requirements of SCC Chapter  14.24 .

             (ii)    Dairy operations must comply with the requirements of RCW Chapter  90.64  (Dairy Nutrient Management Act).

             (iii)    Livestock pasture must be managed so as to maintain vegetative cover sufficient to avoid contributing sediments to a  watercourse  in violation of State water  pollution  control laws.

             (iv)    Any existing or new livestock confinement or concentration of livestock areas that is located upgradient from a  watercourse  which results in bare ground (such as around a watering trough) must be constructed and maintained to prevent sediment and/or nutrient runoff  contaminants  from reaching a  watercourse  in violation of State water  pollution  control laws.

             (b)    Nutrient and  Farm  Chemical Management.

             (i)    The owner or operator must not place manure in a  watercourse  or in a location where such wastes are likely to be carried into a  watercourse  by any means. Spreading of manure within 50 feet of any  watercourse , and spreading of liquid manure on bare ground, is prohibited from October 31st to March 1st; unless otherwise permitted pursuant to:

             (A)    An approved and implemented dairy nutrient management plan (DNMP) as prescribed by RCW Chapter  90.64 ; or

             (B)    A  farm  plan prepared or approved by the Conservation District.

             (ii)    Agricultural operators may not apply crop nutrients other than at  agronomic rates  recommended for that particular crop.

             (iii)     Farm  chemicals may only be applied consistent with all requirements stated on the chemical container labels and all applicable Federal and State laws and regulations, such as RCW Chapter  15.58  (Pesticide Control Act), RCW Chapter  17.21  (Pesticide  Application  Act), and  7  U.S.C.  136  et seq. (Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act).

             (c)    Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Management.

             (i)     Roads  used for ongoing agricultural activities must be designed such that  road  surfaces, fill, and associated  structures  are constructed and maintained to avoid contributing sediment to  watercourses .

             (ii)    Agricultural equipment operation must not cause  watercourse  bank sloughing or other failure due to operation too close to the top of the bank.

             (iii)     Watercourse  construction and maintenance must meet the requirements for  drainage  operation and maintenance described under Subsection (4)(d) of this Section.

             (iv)     V-ditching  must not be constructed to drain into  natural watercourses  or managed  watercourses  with headwaters, unless the topography of the field is such that this is the only alternative to drain the field by gravity. BMPs should be used to minimize impacts to the  watercourse . For the purpose of determining a  natural watercourse , the County will use maps prepared by WDFW for the purposes of the  Drainage  Fish Initiative.

             (d)    Operation and Maintenance of Public and Private Agricultural  Drainage  Infrastructure. The following practices apply to any natural or any managed  watercourse  with headwaters that is part of a  drainage  system:

             (i)    Regularly scheduled agricultural  drainage  infrastructure maintenance that includes dredging or removal of accumulated sediments in any managed  watercourse  with headwaters or managed  watercourse  without headwaters must comply with Washington  Department  of Fish and Wildlife issued hydraulics project approval work windows.

             (ii)    Excavation spoils must be placed so as not to cause bank failures and so that seepage from such spoils will not contribute sediment to the  watercourse .

             (iii)    Mowing or cutting of vegetation located within a managed  watercourse  with headwaters or managed  watercourse  without headwaters that is part of a  drainage  system may be conducted at any time; provided, that the cutting is above the ground surface within the channel and in a manner that does not disturb the soil or sediments; and provided, that the cut vegetation does not block water flow.  Watercourse  bank vegetation must be preserved or allowed to reestablish as soon as practicable after  drainage  construction and maintenance are completed to stabilize earthen ditch banks.

             (iv)    Districts subject to this Section, operating pursuant to authority in RCW Title  85  or  86 , which are conducting  drainage  activities must maintain a  drainage maintenance  plan.

             (v)    Immediate measures necessary to drain fields inundated by an unanticipated flooding event or failure of the agricultural  drainage  infrastructure will be subject to the requirements for emergency  repair  described in SCC  14.24.070 (1).

             (5)    Recognition for Agricultural Owners and Operators Who Have Implemented Extra  Watercourse  Protection Measures. This Subsection intends to recognize the extra  watercourse  protection measures for  ongoing agriculture  taken by landowners or operators who have implemented an approved dairy nutrient management plan (DNMP) or  resource management system plan  (RMS plan) (including, but not limited to, CREP) from SCD or NRCS.

             (a)    Those portions of land upon which owners or operators have sought and implemented an approved DNMP or an  RMS plan  consistent with the conservation practices and management standards that meet the FOTG quality criteria for each natural resource (soil, water, animals, plants and air) are entitled to a presumption of compliance with the “no harm or degradation” standards described in Subsection (3) of this Section. The  RMS plan  or DNMP must include within the planning unit any  watercourses  located on the property, as well as all upland areas within the owner’s control that could potentially adversely impact the  watercourse  and/or associated fish habitat.

             (b)    Such presumption of compliance may be rebutted and enforcement commenced as described in SCC  14.09.285  if the County obtains credible evidence that the agricultural operation is not meeting the no harm or degradation standards of Subsection (3) of this Section. To be entitled to this presumption, the owner or operator must provide the County with documented evidence of implementation of those elements of the approved plan that are relevant to the resource impact at issue at the time a  request for investigation  (RFI) is presented to the County under SCC  14.09.210 .

             (6)    Enforcement. The  Department  is directed to enforce the requirements of this Subsection, including the mandatory  watercourse  protection measures, as described in SCC  14.09.285 . (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20110013 Attch. A (part): Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.130  Hazard tree removal.

             (1)    In a critical area or  critical area buffer , removal of hazardous, diseased, or dead trees and vegetation by the landowner may be permitted in the following circumstances:

             (a)    To control fire; or

             (b)    To halt the spread of disease or damaging insects consistent with the State Forest Practice Act, RCW Chapter  76.09 ; or

             (c)    To avoid a hazard such as  landslides ; or

             (d)    To avoid a threat to existing  structures  or above-ground utility lines; or

             (e)    To avoid a threat to human life or public safety; and

             (f)    The hazardous condition of the tree cannot be lessened with reasonable and proper arboricultural practices.

             (2)    Before hazardous, diseased or dead trees and vegetation may be removed by the landowner pursuant to Subsection (1) of this Section:

             (a)    Unless there is an emergency pursuant to SCC  14.24.070 (1), the landowner must obtain prior written approval from Planning and Development Services. This consent will be processed promptly and may not be unreasonably withheld. If the  Director  fails to respond to a  hazard tree  removal request within 10 business  days , the landowner’s request is conclusively allowed; and

             (b)    The removed tree or vegetation should be left within the  critical areas  or  buffer  unless the  Director , or a  qualified professional , warrants its removal to avoid spreading the disease or pests. If standing dead trees and snags can reasonably and safely be left in place they should be prioritized over the retention of logs in order to accommodate the preservation of wildlife habitat; and

             (c)    Any removed tree or vegetation must be replaced by the landowner with appropriate native species in appropriate size. For removal of one tree, replace with three native trees.  Replacement  must be performed consistent with accepted  restoration  standards for  critical areas  within onecalendar year;

             (d)    For this Section only, a “ qualified professional ” means an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) and American Society of Consulting Arborists (ASCA) that is trained and qualified in tree risk assessment such as through the Tree Risk Assessment Qualification (TRAQ) or equivalent. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.140  Reasonable use exception.

             (1)    Reasonable Use Standards. An  applicant  who is unable to comply with the specific standards of this chapter without forfeiting all economically viable use of the property may seek approval of a “reasonable use” exception (RUE) for single-family residential development under this Section.

             (2)    Determination. To qualify as a reasonable use, the  Director  must find that the proposal meets the following criteria:

             (a)     Application  of this Chapter will deny all economically viable use of the  subject property . In making this determination, the  Director  must also find that:

             (i)    The  subject property  is an existing  legal lot  of record and the inability to derive reasonable use of the  subject property  is not the result of the  applicant ’s actions or that of previous  property owners  in segregating, adjusting one or more boundary lines, dividing or creating the undevelopable condition on the site after June 13, 1996; and

             (ii)    The inability to derive reasonable use of the  subject property  is not the result of prior actions taken in violation of this Title or any other local, State, or Federal law or regulation; and

             (b)    The proposed development activity meets all other requirements of this Title, does not otherwise constitute a  nuisance , or pose a threat to public health, safety, and welfare on or off the site.

             (3)    Reasonable Use Process. The  application  must be made on a form provided by the  Department . The reasonable use exception will be considered under a Type 2 review process of SCC Chapter  14.06  and must follow the public notification procedures described therein. The  Director  must ensure the opportunity for public comment, including that from appropriate Federal, State, and Tribal natural resource agencies, to ensure the use of  best available science  before deciding on reasonable use exception requests and must develop and maintain a public record on each reasonable use exception request which includes all findings, assessments, and public comments. Such record will be made available to the public before the reasonable use exception decision is complete.

             (4)    Submittal Requirements. As part of the reasonable use exception request  application  the  applicant  must submit a critical area report pursuant to SCC  14.24.080  prepared by a qualified critical area professional approved by the County. The report must include the following:

             (a)    An analysis of how the proposal meets requirements for mitigation sequencing specified in SCC  14.24.080 (6). If the impact can be avoided, then it is not eligible for a reasonable use exception. Only the minimum necessary impact to accommodate reasonable use is eligible for a reasonable use exception;

             (b)    Demonstration that the issuance of a zoning  variance  by itself will not provide sufficient relief to avoid the need for the reasonable use exception;

             (c)    A description of the site design and construction staging for the proposal that will have the least impact to the critical area and  critical area buffer ;

             (d)    A  site plan  showing:

             (i)    The critical area,  critical area buffer , and  structure  setback required by this Chapter;

             (ii)    The proposed area of disturbance both on and off the  subject property  pursuant to the disturbance area limitations of Subsection (5) of this Section;

             (iii)    All proposed  structures  and improvements meeting the conditions of Subsection (5) of this Section, including:

             (A)     Building footprints , including garages and other storage  structures ;

             (B)    Parking areas;

             (C)     Driveways ;

             (D)    Paved surfaces, such as walking paths;

             (E)    Patios, decks, and similar  structures ;

             (F)    Utility, septic, and  stormwater  improvements;

             (G)    Yard landscaping;

             (H)    Retaining walls and rockeries;

             (I)    All other  hard surfaces  including gravel;

             (e)    A description of protective measures that will be undertaken, including  pollution  prevention and protection of  native vegetation  and natural soil and hydrologic conditions, and a schedule of the construction activity to avoid interference with wildlife and fisheries rearing, nesting, or spawning activities;

             (f)    An analysis of the impact that the proposed development would have on the critical area and  critical area buffer ;

             (g)    Demonstration that the proposal mitigates for impacts to the critical area and  critical area buffers . All remaining  buffer  areas must be fully vegetated with suitable  native vegetation  for approval of a reasonable use exception;

             (h)    Demonstration that the proposal minimizes net loss of critical area functions to the greatest extent possible;

             (i)    An analysis of whether the improvement is located as far away as possible from the critical area and the  critical area buffer ;

             (j)    An analysis of whether the improvement is located to avoid the removal of existing  native vegetation  with emphasis on preservation of conifers greater than or equal to 24 inches diameter at breast height (dbh), deciduous trees greater than or equal to 20 inches dbh, and forested areas with established duff soil layers; and

             (k)    Such other information or studies as the  Director  may reasonably require.

             (5)    Allowed Use and Maximum Disturbance Limits. The amount of area that will be disturbed by  structure  placement and all land alteration associated with single  family  residential development, including but not limited to  clearing  and  grading , utility installation, decks,  driveways , paved areas, and landscaping, must not exceed the following limits:

             (a)    RUE will only be applicable to sites that do not have an area of 4,000 square feet or more available for development outside the standard  buffer .

             (b)    When  buffer  impacts are allowed through RUE the maximum total combined development area outside the  buffer  and within the critical area or  critical area buffer  will be 4,000 square feet. All areas available for development outside the standard  buffer  must be utilized before any  buffer  impacts can be approved.

             (c)    The amount of allowable disturbance will be that which will have the least impact on the critical area and the  critical area buffer  given the characteristics and context of the  subject property , critical area, and  buffer .

             (d)    To the maximum extent feasible, the disturbance area must be located away from the critical area and critical  buffer  and to avoid the removal of existing  native vegetation  with emphasis on preservation of conifers greater than or equal to 24 inches dbh, deciduous trees greater than or equal to 20 inches dbh, and forested areas with an established duff layer.

             (e)    On sites where the approved 4,000 square feet of developable area is not immediately adjacent to a public or  private road  and an extended  driveway  is required, the  driveway  area necessary to connect the developable area to the access point may be excluded from the 4,000 square feet maximum disturbance. Extended  driveways  that result in critical area and/or  buffer  impacts are subject to mitigation sequencing.

             (6)    Decision Criteria. If the  Director  determines that a project proposal meets the requirements of Subsection (2) of this Section, the  application  may be approved where the  Director  finds:

             (a)    After review of the project under this Chapter, there is no other economically viable  permitted use  of the property with less impact on  wetlands ,  fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas , or  buffers ;

             (b)    The proposed alteration of a  wetland , fish and wildlife habitat conservation area, or  buffer  is the minimum necessary to allow for reasonable use of the property. Activities must be located as far away as possible from  wetlands ,  fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas , and  buffers  and low impact development techniques must be used to the maximum extent possible. In all cases, disturbance of a  wetland , stream, marine water, or  lake  may only occur if no reasonable use can be achieved by limiting the disturbance to the  buffer  associated with that feature;

             (c)    The proposed activity is located to minimize impacts to priority habitats and species identified by the Washington  Department  of Fish and Wildlife;

             (d)    It has been demonstrated that the issuance of a zoning  variance  by itself will not provide sufficient relief to avoid the need for the reasonable use exception. This Section does not relieve an  applicant  from the obligation of complying with applicable  variance  procedures set forth in SCC Chapter  14.58  as they may relate to zoning;

             (e)    The proposal meets the mitigation, maintenance, and monitoring requirements of this Chapter;

             (f)    The proposed development is on is an existing  legal lot ;

             (g)    The inability to derive reasonable use is not the result of the  applicant ’s actions or that of previous  property owners ; and

             (h)    The granting of the reasonable use exception will not confer on the  applicant  any special privilege that is denied by this Chapter to other lands,  buildings , or  structures  under similar circumstances. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2))

        14.24.150  Variances.

             (1)    If the strict  application  of this Chapter is found to deprive the  subject property  of rights and privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity, due to special circumstances applicable to the  subject property , including size, shape, and topography, and reasonable use cannot be achieved through the reasonable use exception process specified in SCC  14.24.140 , a  critical areas  variance may be authorized as provided in SCC Chapter  14.58 ; provided, however, that those surrounding properties that have been developed under regulations in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter will not be the sole basis for the granting of the  variance .

             (a)     Critical Areas  Variances are processed as a Type 3  application  as specified in Table 14.06.150-1.

             (2)    The Hearing Examiner must ensure the opportunity for public comment, including that from appropriate Federal, State, and Tribal natural resource agencies, to ensure the use of  best available science  before deciding on  variance  requests and must develop and maintain a public record on each  variance  request which includes all findings, assessments and public comments. Such record must be made available to the public before the  variance  decision is made.

             (3)     Variances  to the  setback  and  buffer  requirements of this Chapter may only be issued by the Hearing Examiner following review of the requirements listed in Subsections (3)(a) through (3)(h) of this Section. The Hearing Examiner must make a finding for each of the requirements.

             (a)    The issuance of a zoning  variance  by itself will not provide sufficient relief to avoid the need for a  variance  to the dimensional  setback  and other requirements for the  critical areas  regulated by this Chapter; and

             (b)    Preparation of a  critical areas  report and  mitigation plan  by a  qualified professional  pursuant to the requirements of SCC  14.24.080  and all other applicable sections of this Chapter. The  critical areas  report and  mitigation plan  must be prepared using  best available science ; and

             (c)    The conclusions of the  critical areas  report must use  best available science  to support a modification of the dimensional requirements of this Chapter; and

             (d)    The  critical areas  report and  mitigation plan  demonstrate that the proposed project allows for development of the subject parcel with the least impact on  critical areas  while providing a reasonable use of the property; and

             (e)    The reasons set forth in the  application  justify the granting of the  variance , and the  variance  is the minimum  variance  that will make possible the reasonable use of the land,  building , or  structure ; and

             (f)    The granting of the  variance  will be consistent with the general purpose and intent of this Chapter, and will ensure no net loss of ecological functions of the associated  critical areas ; provided, that if the proposal is within the special flood hazard area (SFHA), the  applicant  must demonstrate that the proposal is not likely to adversely affect species protected under the  Endangered Species  Act, or their habitat; and

             (g)    The inability of the  applicant  to meet the  dimensional standards  is not the result of actions by the current or previous owner in subdividing the property or adjusting a boundary line after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter; and

             (h)    The granting of the  variance  is justified to cure a special circumstance and not simply for the economic convenience of the  applicant ; and

             (i)    Reasonable use cannot be achieved through the RUE process described in SCC  14.24.140 .

             (4)    In granting any  variance , the Hearing Examiner will prescribe such conditions and safeguards as are necessary to secure adequate protection of  critical areas  from adverse impacts and to ensure that impacts to  critical areas  or their  buffers  are mitigated to the extent feasible utilizing  best available science . The Hearing Examiner must consider and incorporate, as appropriate, recommendations from Federal, State, and Tribal resource agencies.

             (5)    The County will maintain a record of all decisions made on requests for  variances . Such record must include the basis and rationale for any such decision as well as any comments provided by Federal, State, or Tribal natural resource agencies. Such record must be made available to the public upon request.

             (6)    A  variance  will expire if the use or activity for which it is granted is not commenced within three years of final approval by the Hearing Examiner. Knowledge of the expiration date is the responsibility of the  applicant .

             (7)     Appeals  of the Hearing Examiner decisions on  variance  requests must be made pursuant to the provisions of SCC Chapter  14.06 . (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110008 (part): Ord. O20080014 (part). Formerly 14.24.140)

        14.24.160  Public notice and records.

              Repealed by Ord. O20250011.  (Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.170  Incentives.

             (1)    The following incentives are intended to minimize the burden on individual  property owners  from  application  of the provisions of this Chapter and assist the County in achieving the goals of this Chapter:

             (a)     Open Space . Any  property owner  on whose property a critical area or its associated  buffer  is located and who proposes to put the critical area and  buffer  in a separate  open space  tract may apply for a current use property tax assessment on that separate tract pursuant to RCW Chapter  84.34 . The County must develop current use tax assessment programs for agricultural and small  forest lands  less than 20 acres and other  open spaces .

             (b)     Conservation Easement . Any  person  who owns an identified critical area or its associated  buffer  may place a  conservation easement  over that portion of the property by naming the County or its qualified designee under RCW  64.04.130  as beneficiary of the  conservation easement . This  conservation easement  can be used in lieu of the creation of a separate  critical areas  tract to qualify for  open space  tax assessment described in Subsection (1)(a) of this Section. The purpose of the easement is to preserve, protect, maintain, restore, and limit future use of the property affected. The terms of the  conservation easement  may include prohibitions or restrictions on access and must be approved by the  property owner  and the County.

             (c)    Density Credit. On lands containing  critical areas  or their associated  buffers , the County will allow a transfer of density for residential uses from the portion of the property containing the  critical areas  or  buffers  to that portion of the property that does not contain  critical areas  or  buffers ; provided, that the resulting density on the portion of the property does not contain  critical areas  or their  buffers ; and

             (i)    Does not create any adverse impacts to the critical area that cannot be adequately mitigated; and

             (ii)    Does not create a density greater than that allowed under SCC  14.78.050 (1); and

             (iii)    All other  development regulations  can be met on site.

             (d)    Conservation Futures Fund. The County has established a conservation futures property tax fund as authorized by RCW  84.34.230 . Properties containing  critical areas  or their associated  buffers  may be considered for acquisition under a purchase of development rights with these funds. Acquisitions must be done through the Farmland Legacy Program as recommended by the Conservation Futures Advisory Committee, under the provisions of Ordinance No. 16380 and Resolution No. 16766.

             (2)    For any tract placed into or encumbered with a  PCA , the County will use its best efforts to assist the  property owner  in obtaining open-space tax status on that portion of the property pursuant to RCW Chapter  84.34  and/or in dedicating that property to a nonprofit land trust organization to eliminate or minimize property tax burdens.

             (3)    The County will seek to educate the public regarding  critical areas , the beneficial functions of  critical areas , and the requirements of this Chapter in an effort to encourage citizen understanding, compliance, and stewardship.

             (4)    The County will, where practical, provide incentives to landowners to restore  critical areas  or their  buffers  that have been adversely affected by previous land use activities. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.200  Wetland designations.

             (1)     Wetland , as defined in RCW  36.70A.030 (52), are areas that are inundated or saturated by  surface water  or  groundwater  at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.  Wetlands  generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.  Wetlands  do not include those artificial  wetlands  intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and  drainage  ditches, grass-lined swales, canals,  detention facilities , wastewater treatment facilities,  farm ponds , and landscape amenities, or those  wetlands  created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a  road ,  street , or highway.  Wetlands  may include those artificial  wetlands  intentionally created from nonwetland areas created to mitigate conversion of  wetlands .

             (2)    Designation.  Wetlands  will be identified and designated through a site inspection and/or an approved  critical areas  conducted by a  qualified professional  in accordance with the 1987  Wetland Delineation  Manual by the U.S. Corps of Engineers (Corps), and the applicable regional supplement, 2010 Regional Supplement to the Corps of Engineers  Wetland Delineation  Manual: Western Mountains, Valleys, and Coast Region (Version 2.0) current or as amended. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.210  Wetland classification.

              Wetlands  will be rated according to the Washington State  Wetland  Rating System for Western Washington 2014 Update, Version 2.0 (Department of  Ecology  Publication No. 23-06-009) current or as amended. This document contains the definitions, methods and a rating form for determining the categorization of  wetlands  below:

             (1)    Category I  wetlands  are those  wetlands  of exceptional value in terms of protecting water quality, storing flood and  stormwater , and/or providing habitat for wildlife.

             (2)    Category II  wetlands  are those  wetlands  that provide high levels of some functions which are difficult to replace.

             (3)    Category III  wetlands  are those  wetlands  that provide a moderate level of functions. They are typically more disturbed and have less diversity or are more isolated from other natural resources in the landscape. These  wetlands  can often be adequately replaced with a well-planned mitigation project.

             (4)    Category IV  wetlands  are those  wetlands  that provide the lowest level of function and are often heavily disturbed. While the ability to replace these  wetlands  is likely achievable, it cannot be guaranteed and these  wetlands  may still provide some important functions.

              Wetland  ratings must be completed by a  qualified professional .  Wetland  ratings are valid for five years; after such date the County must determine whether a revision or additional rating is necessary. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.220  Wetland report requirements.

             Any proposed  high impact land use  within 300 feet of  wetland  indicators, and any other proposed land use within 225 feet of  wetland  indicators, requires a  wetland  site assessment completed by a  qualified professional . In addition to the requirements of SCC  14.24.080 , the following must be included in a  wetland  report:

             (1)    A  wetland delineation  must be performed as part of a  site assessment . The delineation must be performed by a  qualified professional  trained in conducting delineations in accordance with the methodology specified under SCC  14.24.200 ; and

             (2)     Wetland  classification, including Cowardin and hydrogeomorphic (HGM) classification, and rating in accordance with SCC  14.24.210 ; and

             (3)    A  site plan  indicating  wetland  and  buffer  boundaries and the locations of all data points; and

             (4)     Functions and values  analysis based on the  wetland  rating, which includes but is not limited to a discussion of water quality, fish and wildlife habitat hydrologic regime, flood and  stormwater  control, base flow and  groundwater  support, cultural and socioeconomic values; and

             (5)    All data sheets and rating forms used to assess the  wetland  conditions on and off site. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.230  Wetland protection standards.

             (1)     Wetland  Buffer Widths.

             (a)    Standard  Wetland  Buffers. Standard  buffers  are based on  land use impact . The following standard  buffers  will be required for  regulated wetlands  unless otherwise provided for in this Section:

             Table 14.24.230-1 Standard  Buffers

                         Standard  Buffers

                          Land Use Impact

                          Wetland  Rating

                         Low

                         Moderate

                         High

                         Category I

                         150 feet

                         225 feet

                         300 feet

                         Category II

                         150 feet

                         225 feet

                         300 feet

                         Category III

                         75 feet

                         110 feet

                         150 feet

                         Category IV

                         25 feet

                         40 feet

                         50 feet

             (b)    Optional  Wetland  Buffers. The  applicant  may choose to have the optional  wetland  buffers in Section 8C.2.3 (as updated in 2014) of  Department  of  Ecology  Publication No. 05-06-008,  Wetlands  in Washington State, Volume 2, apply in place of the standard  buffers  in Subsection (1)(a) of this Section, provided a  site assessment  is completed by a  qualified professional  pursuant to SCC  14.24.080  and applicable impact minimization measures and habitat corridor are applied.

             Table 14.24.230-2 Optional  Buffers

                          Wetland  Rating

                         Habitat Score

                          Land Use Impact

                         Low

                         Moderate

                         High

                         Category I

                         Standard  Buffers  Only

                         Category II

                         8—9

                         150'

                         225'

                         300'

                         6—7

                         75'

                         110'

                         150'

                         3—5

                         50'

                         75'

                         100'

                         Category III

                         8—9

                         150'

                         225'

                         300'

                         6—7

                         75'

                         110'

                         150'

                         3—5

                         40'

                         60'

                         80'

                         Category IV

                         Standard  Buffers  Only

             (c)    Vegetated  Buffer  Standards. All  wetland  buffer widths presume the  buffer  is densely vegetated with a native plant community appropriate for the ecoregion, consisting of an average of 80 percent native cover comprised of trees, shrubs and groundcover plants. If the existing  buffer  is sparsely vegetated or vegetated with invasive species, the  buffer  must either be enhanced through an approved  mitigation plan  or increased per SCC  14.24.240 (1)(c) to ensure the  buffer  provides adequate functions.

             (d)     High impact land use  projects may apply moderate intensity  buffers  if measures to minimize impacts to  wetlands  from  high impact land uses  are implemented. Some of the measures that may be used can be found in  Department  of  Ecology  Publication No. 05-06-008,  Wetlands  in Washington State, Volume 2, Appendix 8C (as updated in 2018).

             (2)     Wetland  buffers are measured horizontally in a landward direction from the  wetland  edge, as delineated in the field. Where a  wetland  buffer ends within a continuous slope of 30 percent or greater, the  buffer  must be extended to a point 25 feet beyond the top of the bank of the sloping area.

             (3)    Any  wetland  created, restored, or enhanced as mitigation for approved  wetland  alterations must also include the standard  buffer  required for the category of the created, restored, or enhanced  wetland .

             (4)     Setback . A 15-foot-wide  structure  setback is required from the upland edge of the entire  buffer  to provide an area for construction and maintenance of  buildings  and other  structures . This  distance  may be modified with approval of the  Director . The following may be allowed within the  structure  setback:

             (a)    Landscaping with non-invasive species only;

             (b)     Building  overhangs if such overhangs do not extend more than 18 inches into the  setback  area;

             (c)    Impervious ground surfaces, such as  driveways  and patios; provided, that such improvements may be subject to special  drainage  provisions adopted for the various  critical areas ; and

             (d)     Trails .

             (5)    Where a  buffer  has been previously established through a County  development review  and is permanently recorded on title or placed within a separate tract or easement, the  buffer  will be as previously established provided:

             (a)    It is equal to or greater than 50 percent of the current required standard  buffer  width for the  wetland  classification; and

             (b)    It is densely vegetated with native plants and invasive plant cover is low; or it is restored to meet vegetated  buffer  standards (Subsection (1)(c) of this Section); and

             (c)    Impact minimization measures are applied (Table 14.24.230-3).

             If Subsections (5)(a) through (5)(c) of this Section are not met, then current  wetland  buffer widths per Subsection (1) of this Section apply. Additional review may be requested by the  applicant  or required by the  Director  to determine whether conditions on site have changed resulting in the previously established  buffer  no longer being applicable. If the provisions of Subsection (5)(a) of this Section cannot be met, the  Director  may allow the  buffer  to be as previously established, provided the proposed development does not expand beyond the previously approved area of impact.

             (6)    Where a legally established and constructed public roadway,  private road , and legally established development as determined by the  Director  functionally disconnects a  wetland  buffer as demonstrated in a critical area report, the  Director  may approve a modification of the standard  buffer  width to the edge of the development, provided:

             (a)    The isolated part of the  buffer  does not provide additional protection of the  wetland ; and

             (b)    The isolated part of the  buffer  provides insignificant biological, geological, or hydrological  buffer  functions relating to the  wetland ; and

             (c)    If the resulting  buffer  distance is less than 75 percent of the standard or optional  buffer  for the applicable  wetland  category, no further reduction will be allowed;

             (d)    The legally established development includes  hard surfaces  a minimum of 20 feet wide that completely isolate the  project area  from the critical area.

             (7)    Category IV  wetlands  less than 4,000 square feet that have been identified through a  site assessment  may be exempted from certain protection standards as outlined below:

             (a)    Category IV  wetlands  less than 4,000 square feet are exempt from the mitigation sequencing requirement to first avoid impacts where:

             (i)    The  wetland  is isolated; and

             (ii)    The  wetland  is not associated with a riparian corridor; and

             (iii)    The  wetland  is not part of a  wetland  mosaic, as described in the Washington State  Wetland  Rating System for Western Washington (Department of  Ecology  Publication No. 23-06-009); and

             (iv)    The  wetland  does not score six or more points for habitat functions based on the Washington State  Wetland  Rating System for Western Washington (Department of  Ecology  Publication No. 23-06-009); and

             (v)    The  wetland  does not contain  Department  of Fish and Wildlife-designated  priority species  or habitat identified as essential for local populations of  priority species ; and

             (vi)    The  wetland  is not required to mitigate  drainage , flooding, or water quality problems in the  watershed ; and

             (vii)    The project impacts are fully mitigated and applicable permit approvals are obtained in accord with SCC  14.24.060 .

             (b)     Wetlands  less than 1,000 square feet may be exempted from  buffer  provisions contained in this Chapter when criteria of Subsections (7)(a)(i) through (7)(a)(vi) of this Section are met.

             (c)    Direct  wetland  impacts are still subject to regulation by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Washington State  Department  of  Ecology . (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.240  Wetland performance-based buffer alternatives and mitigation standards.

              Buffer  widths may be increased, decreased, or averaged in accordance with the following provisions. All mitigation proposed must be consistent with State and Federal  wetland  regulations.

             (1)     Buffer  Width Increasing. The  Director  may require the standard or optional  buffer  width to be increased by the  distance  necessary to protect  wetland  functions and provide connectivity to other  wetland  and habitat areas for one of the following:

             (a)    To maintain viable populations of existing species listed by the Federal or State government as endangered, threatened, or sensitive; or

             (b)    To protect  wetlands  against severe erosion that standard erosion control measures will not effectively address; or

             (c)    To protect the  functions and values  of that  wetland  by compensating for a poorly vegetated  buffer  that has not been addressed through a sufficient replanting plan by increasing the  buffer  required to the next greater  land use impact  buffer requirement or increase the width by 33 percent, whichever is greater;

             (d)    When a Category I or II  wetland  is located within 300 feet of:

             (i)    Another Category I, II or III  wetland ; or

             (ii)    A fish and wildlife habitat conservation area (FWHCA); or

             (iii)    A Type S or F stream; or

             (iv)    A  high impact land use  that is likely to have additional impacts.

             The increased  buffer  distance may be limited to those areas that provide connectivity or are necessary to protect  wetland  and habitat functions. If the  wetland  contains variations in sensitivity, increasing the  buffer  widths will only be done where necessary to preserve the  structure , function and value of the  wetland .

             (2)     Buffer  Width Averaging.  Buffer  averaging allows limited reductions of  buffer  width in specified locations, while requiring increases in others. Prior to considering  buffer  averaging, the  applicant  must demonstrate  application  of mitigation sequencing as required in SCC  14.24.080 . Averaging of required  buffer  widths will be allowed only if the  applicant  demonstrates that all of the following criteria are met:

             (a)    Averaging is necessary to accomplish the purpose of the proposal and no  reasonable alternative  is available; and

             (b)    Averaging width will not adversely impact the  wetland  functions and values; and

             (c)    The total area contained within the  wetland  buffer after averaging is no less than that contained within the standard  buffer  prior to averaging; and

             (d)    The  buffer  width will not be reduced below 75 percent of the standard  buffer  width or 75 feet for Category I and II, 50 feet for Category III, and 25 feet for Category IV, whichever is greater;

             (e)    Compensatory  buffer  enhancement is provided for degraded  buffers  and  buffers  lacking vegetation components.

             (3)     Buffer  Width Decreasing.  Buffer  widths may only be decreased as part of a reasonable use exception or  variance  request pursuant to SCC  14.24.140  or  14.24.150 . Prior to considering  buffer  reductions, the  applicant  must demonstrate  application  of mitigation sequencing as required in SCC  14.24.080 . In all circumstances where a substantial portion of the remaining  buffer  is degraded, the  buffer  reduction plan must include replanting with  native vegetation  in the degraded portions of the remaining  buffer  area and must include a five-year monitoring and maintenance plan.

             (4)    Any  person  who alters or proposes to alter  regulated wetlands  must reestablish, create, rehabilitate and/or enhance areas of  wetland  to compensate for  wetland  losses at the ratios described in mitigation ratios for projects in Western Washington in Table 8C-11 (as updated in 2018) in  Department  of  Ecology  Publication No. 05-06-008,  Wetlands  in Washington State, Volume 2, Section 8C.3.1 (as updated in 2018).

             (5)    Allowed Uses in  Wetlands  or  Wetland  Buffers. The following activities may be permitted within  wetlands  or their  buffers  but must comply with SCC  14.24.080  and  14.24.220 :

             (a)     Roads , Bridges,  Driveways , and Utilities.  Road , bridge,  driveway , and utility construction may be permitted across  wetlands  and/or their  buffers  under the following conditions:

             (i)    It is demonstrated to the  Director  that there are no alternative routes that can be reasonably used to achieve the proposed development; and

             (ii)    The activity will have minimum adverse impact to the  wetland  area; and

             (iii)    The activity will not significantly degrade surface or  groundwater ; and

             (iv)    The intrusion into the  wetland  area and its  buffers  is fully mitigated;

             (v)    The need to intrude into the  wetland  or  buffer  was not created by a development action or  land division  that occurred after June 13, 1996;

             (vi)    A  mitigation plan  prepared by a  qualified professional  demonstrating compliance with mitigation sequencing is provided and approved by the  Director .

             (b)    Low impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the  buffer  and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the  buffer  depending on the sensitivity of the  wetland  involved; provided, that such activity must not result in a decrease in  wetland  functions and values and must not prevent or inhibit the  buffer ’s recovery to at least pre-altered condition or function. Examples of uses and activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases, as long as the activity does not retard the overall recovery of the  buffer , include removal of noxious vegetation, pedestrian  trails ,  structures  under 200 square feet in publicly managed  parks  that are in accordance with  park  management goals and designed to conserve the natural character of the landscape, and viewing platforms less than 200 square feet which may be covered but not enclosed.

             (c)     Stormwater  discharges to  wetlands  must be controlled and treated in accordance with the currently adopted  Stormwater Management Manual . (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.250  Wetland alternative compensation projects.

             (1)    Off-Site Compensation. Off-site compensation allows  replacement  of  wetlands  away from the site on which the  wetland  has been impacted by a regulated activity. The following conditions apply to off-site compensation:

             (a)    Off-site compensation must occur within the same  drainage  basin of the same  watershed  where the  wetland  loss occurs.

              Stormwater  storage function provided by  wetlands  must be provided for within the design of the development project.

             (b)    Off-site compensation can be allowed only under one or more of the following circumstances:

             (i)     On-site compensation  is not feasible due to hydrology, soils, or other physical factors, or on-site opportunities do not have a high likelihood of success;

             (ii)     On-site compensation  is not practical due to probable adverse impacts from surrounding land uses or would conflict with a Federal, State or local public safety directive;

             (iii)    Potential  functions and values  at the site of the proposed  restoration  are greater than the lost  wetland  functions and values;

             (iv)    When the  wetland  to be altered is of a limited function and value and is degraded, compensation must be of the  wetland  community types needed most in the location of compensation and those most likely to succeed with the highest  functions and values  possible;

             (v)     Off-site mitigation  is required by State and/or Federal permitting agencies and is demonstrated to support  watershed  health.

             (2)     Out-of-kind compensation  can be allowed when out-of-kind  replacement  will best meet the provisions of Subsection (3)(a) of this Section and the mitigation sequence outlined in SCC  14.24.080 .

             (3)    Selecting Compensation Sites. Except in the case of cooperative compensation projects in selecting compensation sites,  applicants  must pursue locations in the following order of preference:

             (a)    Restoring  wetlands  on upland sites that were formerly  wetland . This action includes reestablishment and rehabilitation;

             (b)    Creating/establishing  wetlands  on disturbed upland sites, such as those with vegetative cover consisting primarily of nonnative species;

             (c)    Preserving/maintaining a  wetland  to remove threat or prevent decline, such as purchasing land. Preservation does not result in gain of  wetland  acres; or

             (d)    Enhancing significantly degraded  wetlands .

             (4)    Innovative  Wetland  Mitigation Projects. The  Director  may encourage, facilitate, and approve innovative  wetland  mitigation projects. Advance compensation or  mitigation banking  are examples of innovative compensation projects allowed under the provisions of this Section wherein one or more  applicants , or an organization with demonstrated capability, may undertake a compensation project together if it is demonstrated that all of the following circumstances exist:

             (a)    Creation of one or several larger  wetlands  may be preferable to many small  wetlands ; and

             (b)    The group demonstrates the organizational and fiscal capability to act cooperatively; and

             (c)    The group demonstrates that long-term management of the compensation area will be provided; and

             (d)    There is a clear potential for success of the proposed compensation at the identified compensation site; and

             (e)     Wetland  mitigation banking programs consistent with the provisions outlined in the  Department  of  Ecology ’s Publications No. 06-06-011A and No. 06-06-011B (Wetland Mitigation in Washington State, Part 1 and Part 2), RCW Chapter  90.84  and WAC Chapter  173-700  will be considered as a method of compensation for unavoidable, adverse  wetland  impacts associated with future development. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.300  Critical aquifer recharge areas (CARA) intent.

             (1)    This Section establishes areas determined to be critical in maintaining  functions and values  of both  groundwater  quantity and quality, with the purpose of protecting potable water supplies and preserving  groundwater  supplies to  anadromous fish  habitat. This Section specifies regulatory requirements in accordance with RCW  36.70A.170  for development within these areas and provides a methodology by which Skagit County will determine the level of review and any  performance standards  required. The intent of this Section is to:

             (a)    Define minimum regulatory requirements to protect  groundwater  quality and quantity for existing and future use; and

             (b)    Identify  groundwater  resources at risk and activities/uses that impact  groundwater  quality; and

             (c)    Identify practices, alternatives, and protection measures that can prevent the adverse impacts of proposed projects; and

             (d)    Ensure adequate design, construction, management, and operations to protect  groundwater  quality and quantity.

             (2)    Existing and future beneficial uses of  groundwater  must be maintained and protected. Degradation of  groundwater  quality that would interfere with or become injurious to beneficial uses must be avoided.

             (3)    Wherever  groundwater  is determined to be of a higher quality than the criteria established for said waters under this Section, the existing water quality must be protected, and  contaminants  that will reduce the existing quality thereof will not be allowed to enter such waters.

             (4)    It is also the intent of this Section to:

             (a)    Comply with and implement the requirements of Chapter  90.48  RCW, Chapters  173-200 ,  173-201A ,  173-160 ,  246-290  and  246-291  WAC, and Chapter  12.48  SCC; and

             (b)    Carry out powers in manners which are consistent with RCW Chapter  90.54  and WAC Chapters  173-501 ,  173-503 , and  173-505 , as amended; and

             (c)    Comply with the Washington State  Department  of Health’s wellhead protection guidance; and

             (d)    Maintain  groundwater  dependent flow in  anadromous fish  habitat. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.310  Critical aquifer recharge areas designations.

             There are two categories of  critical aquifer recharge areas . These categories are designated to assist the  Director  in determining the level of assessment necessary to evaluate land use proposals. The categories are based on the determination that certain areas require additional scrutiny of the potential impacts of a proposed land use, with consideration given to  hydrogeological susceptibility  and vulnerability. All designated areas are subject to change as data and information are updated or become available.

             (1)    Categories.

             (a)    Category I CARAs are designated because of the need for protection due to a pre-existing land use, or because they are identified by the County, State, or Federal government as areas in need of  aquifer  protection where a proposed land use may pose a potential risk which increases  aquifer vulnerability . Category I CARAs are subject to change. Category I CARAs include:

             (i)    Recharge areas for sole source  aquifers  designated pursuant to the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act and/or shown on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Interactive Map of Sole Source  Aquifers .

             (ii)    Areas identified by the County as potential or existing sea water intrusion areas.

             (iii)    Areas within one-half mile of a  surface water  source limited (SWSL) stream as designated in SCC  14.24.340 (3)(c).

             (iv)    Areas with susceptible soils based on the United States  Department  of  Agriculture  (USDA) Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) data, specifically:

             (A)    Areas with excessively drained and somewhat excessively drained soils; or

             (B)    Areas with shallow aquifers/depths to the seasonal high water table; or

             (C)    Areas with high  drainage  class.

             (v)    Areas designated for wellhead protection pursuant to the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act and/or shown on the Washington State  Department  of Health (DOH) Source Water Assessment Program (SWAP) Map. Areas designated for wellhead protection must, for the purpose of this Section, include the identified recharge areas associated with:

             (A)    Protective areas associated with public drinking water sources established by water systems and approved or assigned by the DOH as defined in WAC  365-190-030 (23).

             (B)    A 600-foot radius around the well site designating the primary short-term  groundwater  contribution area for Group B public water systems as defined in WAC  246-291-125 (3)(d)(ii).

             (b)    Areas throughout the County not identified as Category I CARAs are designated as Category II CARAs.

             (c)    When any portion of the parcel area is located within a Category I CARA, the proposed project may be subject to the additional level of scrutiny of the potential impacts within a Category I CARA. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.320  Critical aquifer recharge area standards.

             (1)     Best Management Practices . Within both Category I and Category II CARAs, all commercial, industrial, institutional, and multifamily residential sites, along with home-based businesses, and other activities that generate  pollution  or handle materials that could pollute  groundwater  must employ  best management practices  (BMPs) to prevent  groundwater  pollution. As a condition of land use or permit approval, the  Director  may require appropriate structural and operational BMPs. Operational BMPs must be specified in an approved source control plan, which includes a spill prevention and response plan. BMPs specified in the  Ecology  Stormwater Management Manual for Western WA (2024 or as updated), developed as part of a  pollution  prevention plan in accordance with WAC Chapter  173-307 , or otherwise developed in accordance with  best available science  may be included in the source control plan.

             (2)    Nonhazardous Uses.  Subdivision  of land, multi-family  residential structures  and all commercial and industrial sites or activities that do not include or involve hazardous substance processing are allowed subject to the following performance standards:

             (a)     Stormwater  treatment and control must be provided in conformance with the Skagit County  stormwater  code.

             (b)    Floor drains must not be allowed to drain to the  stormwater system ,  surface water , or  groundwater .

             (c)    If any roof venting carries  contaminants , then the portion of the roof draining this area must go through pretreatment.

             (d)    All vehicle washing done somewhere other than at a residence must be self-contained or be discharged to a sanitary sewer system, if approved by the sewer utility.

             (e)    For new or changes in regulated activities served by on-site sewage systems, the  applicant  may be required to demonstrate to the  Director  that nitrate levels at the down-gradient property line will not exceed five mg/L. Refer to WAC  246-272A-0320  for details on calculations.

             (f)    Additional protective measures may be required if deemed necessary by the Skagit County Public Health  Department  to protect public health or safety.

             (3)    Agricultural Activities. New agricultural activities that do not involve hazardous substance handling or  application  are allowed within an  aquifer  recharge or  wellhead protection area  subject to the following:

             (a)    The  applicant  is required to submit a  farm  management plan prepared by the USDA, NRCS, Skagit Conservation District, or Washington State University, Cooperative Extension Office that certifies that water quality and quantity within the  aquifer  recharge area is maintained. The  farm  management plan must address the following:

             (i)    The limits of the proposed agricultural activities.

             (ii)    The proposed scope of agricultural activities, including the use of any pesticides, fertilizers, or other chemicals.

             (iii)    The existing nitrate levels on the site and any proposed increases in nitrate levels.

             (b)    Integrated pest management (IPM) practices for pest control and  best management practices  (BMPs) for the use of fertilizers, as described by the Washington State University.

             (c)    Nitrate levels at down-gradient property line must not exceed five mg/L or, if the background nitrate concentration exceeds five mg/L, that the concentration will not be increased more than 0.1 mg/L.

             (d)    Additional protective measures may be required if deemed necessary by the  Department  or to protect public health or safety.

             (4)    Hazardous Uses. Proposals for hazardous substance processing or handling including but not limited to  hazardous waste treatment  and storage facilities, animal containment areas, dry cleaners, funeral services, boat  repair  shops, furniture stripping, photographic processing, creosote and asphalt manufacture and treatment,  golf courses , wood product preserving, motor vehicle service garages, sawmills, printing and publishing shops, and  solid waste  facilities that require a  solid waste  handling permit from the Skagit County Public Health  Department  in an  aquifer  recharge and/or  wellhead protection area  must submit a hydrogeologic assessment that is subject to review and approval of by the  Director . The  Director  has the authority to apply standards deemed necessary to mitigate any negative impacts that may be associated with the proposed development. At a minimum, the activity must employ  AKART  (all known, available, and reasonable treatment) to protect  groundwater  quality.

             (a)    Additional Standards. The following additional standards apply in all CARAs:

             (i)    Storage Tanks. In addition to the requirement to submit a hydrogeologic assessment, the following standards apply to storage tanks in an  aquifer  recharge and/or wellhead protection area:

             (A)    Underground Tanks. All new underground storage facilities used or to be used for the underground storage of hazardous substances or  hazardous waste  must be designed and constructed so as to:

             1.    Prevent releases due to corrosion or structural failure for the operational life of the tank; and

             2.    Be protected against corrosion, constructed of noncorrosive material, steel clad with a noncorrosive material, or designed to include a secondary containment system to prevent the release or threatened release of any stored substance; and

             3.    Use material in the construction or lining of the tank which is compatible with the substance to be stored; and

             4.    The installation of underground storage tanks will also be subject to other State and local permit requirements.

             (B)    Aboveground Tanks. All new aboveground storage facilities used or to be used for the aboveground storage of hazardous substances or  hazardous waste  must be designed and constructed with a double walled tank and a secondary containment system separate from the tank that will hold 110 percent of the tank’s capacity. The secondary containment system or  dike  system must be designed and constructed to contain material stored in the tank(s). Facilities that are subject to Oil  Pollution  Prevention Regulation  40  CFR Part  112  (Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure) are exempt from this standard.

             (ii)    Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers must be applied in accordance with State and Federal law.

             (iii)    Vehicle  repair  and servicing.

             (A)    Vehicle  repair  and servicing must be conducted over impermeable pads and within a covered  structure  capable of withstanding normally expected weather conditions. Chemicals used in the process of vehicle  repair  and servicing must be stored in a manner that protects them from weather and provides containment if leaks occur.

             (B)    No Class V  stormwater  infiltration wells are allowed in CARAs on sites for vehicle  repair  and servicing unless oil water separators are installed. Dry wells on the site prior to the facility establishment must be decommissioned using techniques approved by the  Department  of  Ecology  or an oil water separator will need to be installed prior to commencement of the proposed facility.

             (5)    Commercial, industrial, and institutional activities, including home-based businesses that include potential  pollution  generating activities:

             (a)    A spill response and prevention plan will be required for  development approvals .

             (b)     Best management practices  which meet the requirements of SCC Chapters  14.32 ,  Stormwater  Management, and 16.32, Water  Pollution , and other applicable requirements established by the  Director .

             (c)    Any well which is unusable, abandoned, or whose use has been permanently discontinued, or which is in such disrepair that it is an environmental, safety or public health hazard must be decommissioned in accordance with WAC  173-160-381  to prevent  groundwater  contamination.

             (6)    Prohibited Activities in Category I. The following activities are prohibited in Category I CARAs due to the probability or potential magnitude of their adverse effects on groundwater:

             (a)    Landfills, including, but not limited to, hazardous or dangerous waste disposal facilities as defined in WAC Chapter  173-303 , municipal  solid waste  landfills as defined in WAC Chapter  173-351 , and limited purpose landfills as defined in WAC Chapter  173-350 .

             (b)    Underground injection wells. Class I, III, and IV wells and subclasses 5F01, 5D03, 5F04, 5W09, 5W10, 5W11, 5W31, 5X13, 5X14, 5X15, 5W20, 5X28, and 5N24 of Class V wells, such as:

             (i)    Industrial process water and disposal wells; and

             (ii)    Radioactive waste disposal.

             (c)    Wood treatment facilities that allow any portion of the treatment process to occur over permeable surfaces (both natural and manmade).

             (d)    Facilities that store, process, or dispose of chemicals containing perchloroethylene (PCE) or methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE).

             (e)    Facilities that store, process, or dispose of radioactive substances.

             (f)    Other activities that the  Director  or Health Officer determines would significantly degrade  groundwater  quality or reduce the recharge to  aquifers  currently or potentially used as a potable water source or that may serve as a significant source of base flow to a  flow-sensitive basin  stream. The determination must be made based on credible scientific information. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.330  Critical aquifer recharge areas site assessment requirements.

             (1)    Except as provided in Subsection (4) of this Section, the level of study for a  site assessment  which will be required of the  applicant  by the  Director  for a given development will be based on an initial project review by Skagit County Planning and Development Services that may also include staff from the Health  Department  and a County staff hydrogeologist. The standard  site assessment  requirements are provided in Subsection (2) of this Section. The reporting requirements for a particular project can be modified, at the discretion of the  Director , if it is determined that the preparation of a  site assessment  is not likely to provide additional information that will aid in the assessment of likely impacts to  groundwater  quality or quantity.

             (2)     Site Assessment  Requirements. Unless the scope of the  site assessment  has been modified by the  Director , the  site assessment  must satisfy the requirements of SCC  14.24.080 , and must include:

             (a)    A  site plan  acceptable to the  Director , which indicates the approximate location of known or geologically representative wells (abandoned and active), springs, and surface  watercourses  within 1,000 feet of the project property.

             (b)    A description of the site-specific hydrogeological characteristics regarding potential impact(s) to the quantity or quality of underlying aquifer(s). At a minimum this will include a description of the lithology, depth and static water level of known underlying aquifer(s), and depiction of  groundwater  flow direction and patterns on the appropriate map.

             (c)    Identification of the initial receptors of potential adverse impacts located hydraulically down-gradient and within 1,000 feet of the project or as otherwise directed by the  Director .

             (3)    Additional  Site Assessment  Elements. After the initial project review, one or more of the  site assessment  elements listed below may be required based upon the proposed project activity, CARA classification, complexity of underlying hydrogeological conditions, and/or the perceived potential to adversely impact hydraulically downgradient receptors. One or more of these additional  site assessment  elements may also be required if the  applicant  chooses to demonstrate that certain mitigation measures are not necessary to protect the quantity or quality of the underlying aquifer(s), or that the project does not pose a detrimental risk to hydraulically downgradient receptors. Additional  site assessment  elements include:

             (a)    Lithologic characteristics, stratigraphic relationships, depth to water, chemical retardation factors, adsorption, and the presence or absence of an impermeable layer of the affected aquifer(s) and overlying geologic units and soil types including thickness, horizontal and vertical extent, permeability, and infiltration rates of surface soils.

             (b)    Delineation of identified structural features such as faults, fractures, and fissures.

             (c)     Aquifer  characteristics including determination of recharge and  discharge  areas, transmissivity, storage coefficient, hydraulic conductivity,  porosity , and estimate of  groundwater  flow direction, velocity and patterns for the affected aquifer(s).

             (d)    Estimate of precipitation and evapotranspiration rates for the  project area .

             (e)    Preparation of appropriate hydrogeological cross sections depicting underlying lithology and stratigraphy, aquifer(s), and potential or probable  contaminant  pathways from a chemical release.

             (f)     Contaminant  fate and transport including probable migration pathways and travel time of potential  contaminant  release(s) from the site through the unsaturated  zone  to the aquifer(s) and through the aquifer(s), and how the contaminant(s) may be attenuated within the unsaturated  zone  and the aquifer(s) with consideration to advection, dispersion, and diffusion of  contaminants  in the  groundwater .

             (g)    Delineation of areas potentially affected by  contaminant  migration on the ground surface and/or through potentially affected aquifer(s).

             (h)    Determination of background or existing  groundwater  quality underlying the  project area .

             (i)    Development of a  groundwater  monitoring program to measure potential impacts of the development to underlying aquifer(s).

             (j)    Development of a spill plan and/or contingency plan, which meets the requirements of SCC Chapters  14.32 ,  Stormwater  Management, and 16.32, Water  Pollution , describing the specific actions which will be taken if proposed equipment or materials may introduce  contaminants , a release of a contaminant(s) occurs, or if  groundwater  monitoring results indicate a contaminant(s) from the site has entered the underlying aquifer(s).

             (k)    Determination of the degree of continuity between  groundwater  and nearby  surface water  including potential impacts to flows in  surface water  source limited (SWSL) streams from proposed  groundwater  withdrawals, and potential impacts to  surface water  quality from site runoff or contaminated  groundwater  discharge.

             (l)    Assessment of the potential for pumping-induced seawater intrusion.

             (m)    Nitrate Loading Assessment. For projects that have the potential to adversely impact  groundwater  quality by nitrate loading, the  applicant  must test existing wells and/or required test wells for nitrate as nitrogen and calculate the current and projected future  groundwater  nitrate concentrations at full project build-out, at an appropriate point of compliance, as determined by project characteristics, and in a methodology approved by the County. If the calculated nitrate loading in the intended water supply equals or exceeds five milligrams per liter nitrate as nitrogen, the  applicant  must develop a  mitigation plan  with the point of compliance determined based on project characteristics.

             (4)    Exemptions. The following activities may be exempted from the assessment requirements of this Section:

             (a)    Activities that legally existed on or before June 13, 1996. Expansions or changes in use must comply with the applicable provisions of this Section.

             (b)    Activities allowed without standard  critical areas  review pursuant to SCC  14.24.070 .

             (c)    Residential uses, including accessory  building permits  and  accessory dwelling unit  (ADU)  building permits , other than those having activities covered in SCC  14.24.320 (4).

             (d)    Single-family residential  building permits  where a  site assessment  was required to be completed for the  land division . To meet the conditions of this exemption, the  applicant  must comply with the recorded plat notes and the applicable mitigation measures contained in the  site assessment .

             (e)    Activities already permitted and regulated by the State or the Skagit County Health  Department  to incorporate  best management practices . (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.340  Critical aquifer recharge area protection plans.

             The  Director  will review  development proposals  to assess aquifer(s) vulnerability and establish needed mitigation measures. Where determined to be necessary through the  site assessment  process, or otherwise required under SCC  14.24.310 (1)(a)(v),  development approvals  must include conditions designed to prevent degradation of water quality or reduction in recharge to underlying aquifer(s). The project must not cause exceedance of the water quality standards specified in WAC Chapter  173-200  or otherwise violate the anti-degradation requirements of WAC Chapter  173-200 .

             (1)    Critical  Aquifer  Recharge Area (CARA) Protection Plan Elements. In addition to adhering to any of the required protection measures identified above, the  applicant  must develop for approval by the  Director  a plan for the proposed development. All conditions applied to permits must be based on all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment. Compliance with the plan will be enforceable by the  Director . The  applicant  may amend the plan with the approval of the  Director . The  Director  may, based on performance criteria and monitoring results, require additional amendments to the plan. The plan must contain the project’s permit conditions and, as applicable:

             (a)    A description of the measures to be taken, how they will be implemented, and performance criteria.

             (b)    An environmental monitoring plan describing the monitoring program, maintenance, and reporting requirements.

             (c)    A contingency plan describing corrective actions to be taken if monitoring results indicate that required measures are not effectively protecting  groundwater  resources and human health. The  Director  has the authority to impose additional required corrective actions where such measures are necessary to protect  groundwater  resources or human health. Where appropriate contingencies are not feasible and result in an activity posing unacceptable risk to  groundwater  resources or human health, the  Director  must deny the proposal.

             (d)    Multiple-stage (or phased) development must consider the total build-out of the project in terms of  critical aquifer recharge areas  protection to allow for an assessment of the cumulative impacts of the entire development.

             (e)    Conditions that would precipitate ceasing the project operation altogether.

             (f)    Wellhead Protection. Where a wellhead protection plan addressing the  project area  exists, the  Director  must use the recommendations contained in the wellhead protection plan as a basis for formulating required mitigation measures. In the absence of such plan, the  Director  will contact the owner of the public water system impacted by the proposed project and jointly develop protection measures, a summary of which must be signed by the  applicant  and recorded with the  applicant ’s property title.

             (g)    Seawater Intrusion. Protection must be consistent with SCC  14.24.380 , Seawater intrusion areas.

             (h)    Sole Source  Aquifer . See SCC  14.78.050 (2)(c). There will be no density bonus for  CaRD  developments in areas designated as a “sole source  aquifer ,” except where the source of water is from a public water system whose source is outside the designated area or from an approved alternative water system pursuant to SCC Chapter  12.48 .

             (i)    Nitrate Loading.

             (i)    General Requirements. If a calculated nitrate loading concentration for a project at the designated point of compliance per SCC  14.24.330 (3)(m) is equal to or greater than five milligrams per liter nitrate as nitrogen, then the  applicant  must be required to place a notification on the documents of title for the property affected and a monitoring plan must be developed to monitor the nitrate level and include a contingency plan to be implemented if the nitrate level exceeds 10 milligrams per liter nitrate as nitrogen.

             (ii)     Land Divisions . If the calculated nitrate loading concentration for a  land division  at the designated point of compliance per SCC  14.24.330 (3)(m) is equal to or greater than five milligrams per liter nitrate as nitrogen, then the  applicant  must:

             (A)    Develop a plan to minimize the nitrate loading rate; and

             (B)    Develop a contingency plan to be implemented if the nitrate concentration exceeds 10 milligrams per liter nitrate as nitrogen; and

             (C)    Place notification on the plat stating that  groundwater  protection and contingency plans exist.

             (iii)    Mitigation of nitrate in  groundwater  from on-site septic systems may include decreasing the density of septic system drainfields.

             (2)    Recording of Plan Summaries/Title Notices.

             (a)    General Requirements. The  Director  may require that the  applicant  record a County-approved summary of the protection/contingency plan on the property title. A copy of the recorded summary must be provided to the  Director . If a  property owner  can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the  Director , that protection measures are no longer necessary, the  Director  must approve the addition of language on the title for the property nullifying the requirements.

             (b)     Land Divisions . The  Director  will require the  applicant  for a  land division  to record the plan/notice as part of the plat notes. If the plan is not recorded as or referenced by a plat note, the  applicant  must record the plan on the affected property title(s).

             (3)     Surface Water  Source Limited (SWSL) Stream Protection.

             (a)    If a project, excluding additions to a single-family  dwelling unit  that rely on an existing domestic  groundwater  system, is located within one-half mile of any of the streams identified in Subsection (3)(d) of this Section as SWSL streams the following mitigation measures will be required, as applicable:

             (i)    Public Water. If an existing public water system, the source for which is located outside of the  watershed  containing the project, is timely and reasonably available to a project property within a SWSL  watershed , and where the water provider is willing and able to provide safe and reliable potable water service, then the project will be required to connect to the public water supply as a condition of project approval.

             (ii)    Interim  Groundwater  Withdrawals. If public water is not timely and reasonably available, as specified in Subsection (3)(a)(i) of this Section, the  applicant  may utilize  groundwater  withdrawn from the SWSL  watershed  on an interim basis, providing that the property is subject to mandatory participation in a local utility district (LUD) or special improvement district that will provide potable water service to the property if and when that occurs. The  property owner  will be required to  sign  a written agreement with the County agreeing not to protest the LUD or special improvement district, and have those conditions recorded on the property title before a County permit or  land division  is approved. The  property owner  must also agree through the above written agreement to connect all water fixtures to this public water system as soon as it is timely and reasonably available, and must decommission any well(s) utilized for interim  groundwater  withdrawals in accordance with applicable State and County rules and regulations expediently following connection to the public system.

             (iii)    Lawn Watering. Lawn water restrictions or other water use conservation measures will be required for properties included in  land divisions  approved after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. Lawn watering restrictions for interim  groundwater  withdrawals will not apply under the following conditions:

             (A)    The proposed development connects to an existing public water supply as described in Subsection (3)(a)(i) of this Section; or

             (B)    The proposed development is drawing water from an  aquifer  that meets the demonstration standard as specified in Subsection (3)(e) of this Section.

             (iv)    Public Water Lines. The County should encourage extension of new public water lines to serve existing  legal lots  of record in SWSL  watersheds  through establishment of a utility improvement district or other shared funding mechanism provided any such extension outside of an  urban growth area  is consistent with the County’s  Comprehensive Plan .

             (v)     Comprehensive Plan . Where economically feasible, the County will consider as part of its  Comprehensive Plan  limitations on the uses and densities within designated SWSL stream corridors to limit new individual wells as necessary to protect tributary base flows.

             (b)    If a project is located within one-half mile of any of the streams identified in Subsection (3)(d) of this Section as SWSL on-site  stormwater  dispersion or infiltration will be required using BMP designs specified by SCC Chapter  14.32 .

             (c)    Samish River Basin. There will be no density bonus for  CaRD  developments that rely on  groundwater  as the water source and where the well is located within one-half mile of the Samish River or Friday Creek.

             (d)    For the purposes of implementing this Chapter, the following streams are designated as  surface water  source limited streams:

             (i)    Carpenter Creek;

             (ii)    Coal Creek;

             (iii)    Diobsud Creek;

             (iv)    Friday Creek;

             (v)    Grandy Creek;

             (vi)    Jones Creek;

             (vii)     Lake  Erie;

             (viii)    Nookachamps Creek;

             (ix)    Samish River;

             (x)    Whitehall Creek.

             (e)    Exceptions. Projects are exempt from the measures described in Subsections (3)(a) and (3)(b) of this Section under the following conditions:

             (i)    The  applicant  demonstrates, through an appropriate hydrogeologic characterization, that any  groundwater  withdrawal proposed for the project will not adversely impact stream flows deemed critical to salmonids in a SWSL stream; provided, that a report referencing the hydrological determination must be recorded on the plat and/or title; or

             (ii)    If the project is located outside of the  watershed  of the streams listed in Subsection (3)(d) of this Section; or

             (iii)    If the project is located in an area where  groundwater  is under tidal influence. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.350  Instream-flow rules.

             (1)    Except as provided in Subsection (2) of this Section, average daily  groundwater  withdrawals for projects initiated after the effective dates indicated below will be limited in each instream-flow basin with instream flow rules. The  Director , in coordination with the Washington  Department  of  Ecology , will be responsible for ensuring compliance with RCW  36.70A.590  and  90.44.050 , WAC Chapters  173-501 ,  173-503 , and  173-505 .

             (a)    Skagit River Basin is regulated under WAC Chapter  173-503 . Skagit County adheres to the rules and regulations listed in the Instream Resources Protection Program, identified as Lower and Upper Skagit Water Resources Inventory Area (WRIA 3 and 4).

             (i)    Effective Date.  Groundwater  withdrawals that were established after April 14, 2001, will be subject to WAC Chapter  173-503 .

             (b)    Stillaguamish River Basin is regulated under WAC Chapter  173-505 . Skagit County adheres to the rules and regulations listed in the Instream Resources Protection Program, identified as Stillaguamish Water Resources Inventory Area (WRIA 5).

             (i)    Effective Date.  Groundwater  withdrawals that were established after September 26, 2005, will be subject to WAC Chapter  173-505 .

             (c)    Nooksack River Basin is regulated under WAC Chapter  173-501 . Skagit County adheres to the rules and regulations listed in the Instream Resources Protection Program, identified as Nooksack Water Resources Inventory Area (WRIA 1).

             (i)    Effective Date.  Groundwater  withdrawals that were established after June 27, 2020, will be subject to WAC  173-501-065 .

             (2)    Mitigation Option. The  applicant  adopts mitigation measures approved by the Health Officer, using criteria developed in coordination with the Washington  Department  of  Ecology , to prevent the  groundwater  withdrawal from adversely impacting stream flows deemed critical to salmonids in instream-flow basins. The  mitigation plan  must provide mitigation that fully offsets the consumptive impacts of future water use. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.360  Flow-sensitive basin water withdrawal mitigation.

              Repealed by Ord. O20250011.  (Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.370  Delineation of flow-sensitive basins.

              Repealed by Ord. O20250011.  (Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.380  Seawater intrusion areas.

             (1)    Applicability. This Section applies to wells and  applications  for  building permits ; special use permits; and  land divisions  in the following areas, in order to protect  groundwater  quality and quantity as directed by the Growth Management Act, and in accordance with  groundwater  antidegradation policy as described in WAC  173-200-030 , RCW Chapter  90.48  and RCW  90.54.020 :

             (2)    Designations.

             (a)    “Seawater intrusion protection areas” means those areas:

             (i)    Within one-half mile of a marine shoreline; and

             (ii)    The entirety of Guemes, Sinclair, Cypress, and Vendovi Islands.

             (3)     Application  Requirements.

             (a)    Prior to drilling any new well in an area designated as a seawater intrusion protection area, an  application  must include:

             (i)    A  site plan  to scale, including:

             (A)    A dedicated inland well site location;

             (B)    Estimated depth of proposed well;

             (C)    An estimated ground elevation of the well using an approved measurement method;

             (D)    Location,  distance , depth and chloride levels of surrounding wells within 1,000 feet of proposed well, as available;

             (ii)    A drilling plan as provided by a licensed driller or  qualified professional  that includes the expected substrate to be encountered, expected depth to target  aquifer , method of construction, and any other applicable information;

             (iii)    Payment of applicable fees.

             (b)    For Alternative Water Sources Other Than  Groundwater  Wells. An  application  proposing use of an alternative water source must include the following:

             (i)    Documentation of system design consistent with this Section and SCC  12.48.250 ;

             (ii)    Payment of applicable fees.

             (c)    For  Land Divisions . In addition to any applicable requirements above, an  application  for a  land division  proposing use of a well must include the following:

             (i)    An assessment of the available  groundwater , including a report from a demonstration well located so that it will represent the  groundwater  under the entire  land division  and with consideration to where other wells will be located in the  land division ;

             (ii)    If the proposed  land division  is within an area of documented chlorides in excess of 25 ppm, all well locations must be specified and spaced 100 feet or more from any other well, including wells on neighboring properties. If the proposed  land division  is located in areas where chloride levels exceed 100 ppm, all wells must receive approval of the Health  Department .

             (d)    For Wells in a Sole Source  Aquifer  Area. Prior to drilling any new well in an area designated a sole source  aquifer , the information set forth in Subsection (3)(a) of this Section must be submitted to the  Department .

             (4)    Development Standards for Alternative Water Sources.

             (a)    Where a known seawater intrusion problem exists, alternative sources of water other than  groundwater  wells are encouraged, but must comply with the requirements of SCC  12.48.250 .

             (b)    Reverse Osmosis Systems. Any reverse osmosis system must be designed to:

             (i)    Use seawater collected from the open sea as the water source; and

             (ii)     Discharge  effluent only to the open sea.

             (5)    Development Standards for Wells.

             (a)    For both existing and new wells, a well driller must:

             (i)    Install a wellhead source meter;

             (ii)    Install a sounding tube to allow water level measurements;

             (iii)    Install a valve restrictor or other permanent flow restrictive equipment to set the maximum pumping rate consistent with Table 14.24.380-1.

             (b)    Documentation of Installation. The  applicant  must submit the following:

             (i)    Well report with tag ID;

             (ii)    Proof of installation of the sounding tube;

             (iii)    Proof of installation of a valve restrictor or other permanent flow restrictive equipment in accordance with Table 14.24.380-1;

             (iv)    Chloride and conductivity test results from an untreated water sample as processed by a Washington State  Department  of  Ecology  certified laboratory; and

             (v)    A final land elevation of the well using an accurate method approved by the  Director .

             (c)    Maximum Pumping Rates.

             (i)    The maximum pumping rate for wells must be set consistent with the following table, based on chloride test results from the well under review as reported by an Ecology-certified laboratory.

             (ii)    A maximum pumping rate other than that in the table may be set if approved by a licensed hydrogeologist or  qualified professional  approved by the County.

                     Table 14.24.380-1. Maximum pumping rates.

                         Chloride level

                         Location

                         0—24 ppm

                         25—99 ppm

                         100—250 ppm

                         Less than 1/2 mile from the coast for areas in Subsection (1)(a) of this Section

                         3 gpm

                         2 gpm

                         1 gpm

                         Or as determined or approved by a hydrogeologist engaged or employed by the County

                         Less than 1/2 mile from the coast for islands in Subsection (1)(b) of this Section

                         3 gpm

                         2 gpm

                         1 gpm

                         Greater than 1/2 mile from the coast for islands in Subsection (1)(b) of this Section

                         3 gpm

                         3 gpm

                         3 gpm

             (6)    Sampling. All  groundwater  sources located in seawater intrusion areas shall be sampled for chloride and conductivity in April and September of each year and submitted to Skagit County Planning and Development Services annually. Deviations from this sampling requirement may be considered by the  Director . Water quality results must be analyzed by a Washington State  Department  of  Ecology  certified laboratory.

             (7)    Public Water. If connection to an existing public water system is timely and reasonably available to a project property within a seawater intrusion area, and where the water provider is willing and able to provide safe and reliable potable water service, then the project will be required to connect to the public water supply as a condition of project approval.

             (8)    Authority for Denial. If chloride levels are equal to or above 250 ppm from a  groundwater  source, development cannot utilize that water source. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240004 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O20230001 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6))

        14.24.400  Geologically hazardous areas designations.

              Geologically hazardous areas  must be designated consistent with the definitions provided in WAC  365-190-030  and  365-190-120 . These include areas susceptible to the effects of erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geologic events. They pose a threat to the health and safety of citizens when incompatible residential, commercial, industrial, or infrastructure development is sited in areas of a hazard. Geologic hazards pose a risk to life, property, and resources when  steep slopes  are destabilized by inappropriate activities and development or when  structures  or facilities are sited in areas susceptible to natural or human-caused geologic events. Some geologic hazards can be reduced or mitigated by engineering, design, or modified construction practices so that risks to health and safety are acceptable. When technology cannot reduce risks to acceptable levels,  building  and other construction in, above, and below  geologically hazardous areas  must be avoided. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.410  Geologically hazardous areas known or suspected risk.

              Geologically hazardous areas  are classified as “known or suspected risk” or “unknown risk.” Areas of known or suspected risk are indicated in Subsections (1) through (5) of this Section.

             (1)    The following are considered known or suspected erosion hazards:

             (a)    Areas with gradients greater than or equal to 30 percent.

             (b)    Areas located within the following map units: No. 1 Andic Cryochrepts, Nos. 3 and 4 Andic Xerocrepts, No. 13 Birdsview, Nos. 47 and 48 Dystric Xerochrepts, Nos. 50 and 51 Dystic Xerorthents, Nos. 63 and 65 Guemes, No. 69 Hoogdal, No. 90 Lithic Haploxerolls, No. 91 Marblemount, No. 99 Mundt and Nos. 150 and 151 Typic Croyorthods or mapped severe erosion hazard, as identified in the U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture  Natural Resources Conservation Service  Soil Survey of Skagit County  Area, WA (1989 or as revised).

             (c)    Coastal beaches or bluffs.

             (d)    Areas designated in the  Department  of  Ecology , Coastal  Zone  Atlas, Washington, Volume Two Skagit County (1978 or as revised) as U (Unstable), URS (Unstable Recent Slide), or UOS (Unstable Old Slide).

             (e)    Areas susceptible to rapid stream incision and stream bank erosion.

             (2)     Landslide  hazards are areas potentially subject to  landslides  based on a combination of geologic, topographic and hydrologic factors. The following are known or suspected  landslide  hazards:

             (a)    Areas designated in the  Department  of  Ecology , Coastal  Zone  Atlas, Washington, Volume Two, Skagit County (1978 or as revised) as U (Unstable), URS (Unstable Recent Slide), or UOS (Unstable Old Slide).

             (b)    Areas with all three of the following characteristics:

             (i)    Slopes steeper than 15 percent;

             (ii)    Hillsides intersecting geologic contacts with a relatively permeable sediment overlying a relatively impermeable sediment or bedrock; and

             (iii)    Springs or  groundwater  seepage.

             (c)    Slopes of 40 percent or steeper and with a vertical relief of 10 feet or more.

             (d)    Areas of previous failure such as earth slumps, earthflows, mudflows, lahars, debris flows, rock slides,  landslides  or other failures as observed in the field or as indicated on maps or in technical reports published by the U.S. Geological Survey, the Washington Geological Survey, or other documents authorized by government agencies.

             (e)    Potentially unstable areas resulting from rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, and undercutting by wave action.

             (f)    Coastal bluffs.

             (g)    Slopes with a gradient greater than 80 percent and subject to rock fall.

             (h)    Areas that are at risk from snow avalanches.

             (i)    Areas designated on the Skagit County Alluvial Fan Study Orthophoto Maps as alluvial fans or as identified by the  Director  during site inspection.

             (j)    Areas located in a narrow canyon potentially subject to inundation by debris flows or catastrophic flooding.

             (k)    Those areas delineated by the U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture ’s Natural Resources Conservation Service  Soil Survey of Skagit County  as “severe” (Table 9) limitation for  building  development.

             (l)    Areas that have shown movement during the Holocene epoch (from 10,000 years ago to the present) or which are underlain or covered by mass wastage debris of this epoch.

             (m)    Slopes that are parallel or subparallel to planes of weakness (such as bedding planes, joint systems, and fault planes) in subsurface materials.

             (3)     Seismic hazard areas  are subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake-induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, soil liquefaction or surface faulting. The following are known or suspected seismic hazards:

             (a)    Areas located within a high liquefaction susceptibility as indicated on the Washington  Department  of Natural Resources’ Washington Geologic Information Portal. A  site assessment  is not required for high liquefaction hazard areas for single-family residence proposals unless other criteria provided in this Section apply.

             (b)    Areas located within one-quarter mile of an active fault as indicated on investigative maps or described in studies by the United States Geologic Survey, Washington Geological Survey, or other documents authorized by government agencies, or as identified during site inspection.

             (c)    Those known or suspected erosion and  landslide  hazards referenced in Subsections (1) and (2) of this Section.

             (d)    Tsunami and seiche hazard areas include coastal areas and  lake  shoreline areas susceptible to flooding, inundation, debris impact, and/or mass wasting as the result of coastal or inland wave action generated by seismic events or other geologic events. Suspect tsunami hazard areas are indicated on the Tsunami Hazard Map of the Anacortes-Whidbey Island Area, Washington: Modeled Tsunami Inundation from a Cascadia Subduction  Zone  Earthquake. A  site assessment  is not required for tsunami and seiche hazard areas but they are addressed through SCC Chapter  14.34 , Flood Damage Prevention.

             (4)     Volcanic hazard areas  are subject to pyroclastic flows, lava flows, debris avalanche, and inundation by debris flows, mudflows, lahars or related flooding resulting from volcanic activity. Suspect volcanic hazards include those areas indicated in the United States Geologic Survey Open-File Report 95-499 as the volcanic hazard  zone  for Glacier Peak, Washington; or in the United States Geologic Survey Open-File Report 95-498 as the  volcanic hazard area  of Mount Baker, Washington. A  site assessment  is not required for  volcanic hazard areas  unless other criteria provided in this Section apply.

             (5)     Mine hazard areas  as designated on the  Department  of Natural Resources Map: Coal Measures of Skagit County (1924), as indicated on the Washington  Department  of Natural Resources’ Washington Geologic Information Portal, or within 200 feet of any other current or historic mine operations determined to be a suspect or known geologically hazardous area by the  Director . (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.420  Geologically hazardous areas site assessment requirements.

             (1)    If the  Director  determines that the proposed development activity is located within 200 feet of an area of known or suspected risk as indicated in SCC  14.24.410 , or within a  distance  from the base of a  landslide  hazard area equal to the vertical relief, and that the geologic condition may pose a risk to life and property, or other  critical areas  on and off the  project area , a geologic hazard  site assessment  as indicated in this Section will be required. This  site assessment  must be prepared by a  qualified professional .

             (2)    The geologically hazardous area  site assessment  must classify the type of geologic hazard(s) in accordance with SCC  14.24.400  and  14.24.410 . In addition to the requirements of SCC  14.24.080 , the  site assessment  must include the following:

             (a)    A  site plan  depicting the height of slope, slope gradient, and cross section indicating the stratigraphy of the site. The  site plan  must indicate the location of all existing and proposed  structures  and any significant geologic features such as outcrops, springs, seeps,  ponds , streams, or other water bodies; and

             (b)    An assessment of the geologic characteristics and engineering properties of the soils, sediments, and/or rock of the  subject property  and potentially affected adjacent properties. Soils must be described in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System; and

             (c)    A description of load intensity, surface and  groundwater  conditions, public and private sewage disposal systems, fills and excavations, and all structural development; and

             (d)    A description of the extent and type of vegetative cover including tree attitude; and

             (e)    For potential coastal bluff geologic hazards: estimate of the bluff retreat rate, which recognizes and reflects potential catastrophic events such as seismic activity or a 100-year storm event; and

             (f)    For potential  landslide  hazards: estimate slope stability and the effect construction and placement of  structures  will have on the slope over the estimated life of the  structure . Quantitative analysis of slope stability or slope stability modeling may be required by the  Director ; and

             (g)    Additional  site assessment  elements may be required by the  Director .

             (3)    Properties containing geologically hazardous conditions identified by the  Director  and the  qualified professional  require a geologically hazardous area  mitigation plan . (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.430  Geologically hazardous area mitigation standards.

             The  mitigation plan  must be prepared by a  qualified professional  and include a discussion on how the project has been designed to avoid and minimize the impacts discussed under SCC  14.24.420 . The plan must also make a recommendation for the minimum  setback  from the geologic hazard.  Mitigation plans  must include the location and methods of  drainage , locations and methods of erosion control, a vegetation management and/or  restoration  plan, and/or other means for maintaining long-term stability of geologic hazards. The plan must also address the potential impact of mitigation on the hazard area, the  subject property , and affected adjacent properties. The  mitigation plan  must be approved by the  Director  and be implemented as a condition of project approval.

             One or more of the following mitigation standards, as required by the  Director , must be included as components of a  mitigation plan  pursuant to the requirements of SCC  14.24.420 . Mitigation standards, other than those listed below, may be required by the  Director  depending on the geologic hazard and the site conditions.

             (1)    Mitigation Standards.

             (a)    A  construction stormwater pollution prevention plan  per SCC Chapter  14.32  (Stormwater Management).

             (b)    A plan for the collection, transport, treatment,  discharge , and/or recycling of  stormwater  in accordance with the requirements of SCC Chapter  14.32 , as amended. Surface  drainage  must not be directed across the face of a  landslide  hazard (including marine bluffs or ravines). If  drainage  must be discharged from the hazard area into adjacent waters, it will be collected above the hazard and directed to the water by tight line drain and provided with an energy dissipating device at the point of  discharge .

             (c)    All proposals involving excavation and/or placement of fill must be subject to structural review under the appropriate provisions of the International  Building  Code (IBC) as amended by Skagit County.

             (d)    Critical facilities as defined under SCC Chapter  14.04  must not be sited within designated  geologically hazardous areas  with the exception of  volcanic hazard areas . No critical facilities shall be located within one-quarter mile of an active fault.

             (e)    All infiltration systems, such as  stormwater  detention and  retention facilities  and curtain drains utilizing buried pipe or French drains, are prohibited in  geologically hazardous areas  and their  buffers  unless the  mitigation plan  indicates such facilities or systems will not affect slope stability.

             (f)    Existing vegetation must be maintained in  landslide  and  erosion hazard areas  and associated  buffers . Any replanting that occurs must consist of native trees, shrubs, and ground cover that is compatible with the existing surrounding  native vegetation , meets the objectives of erosion prevention and site stabilization, and does not require permanent irrigation for long-term survival. Normal nondestructive pruning and trimming of vegetation for maintenance purposes; or thinning of limbs of individual trees to provide a view corridor, will not be subject to these requirements.

             (g)    A minimum  buffer  width of 30 feet must be established from the top, toe, and all edges of all  landslide  and  erosion hazard areas . For  landslide  and  erosion hazard areas  with a vertical relief greater than 50 feet, the minimum  buffer  will be 50 feet. The  buffer  may be increased by the  Director  for development adjacent to a marine bluff or ravine which is designated as Unstable in the Coastal  Zone  Atlas, Washington, Volume Two, Skagit County (1978 or as revised) or where the  Director  determines a larger  buffer  is necessary to prevent risk of damage to existing and proposed development.

             (h)    Structural  development proposals  within  seismic hazard areas  must meet all applicable provisions of the IBC as amended by Skagit County. The  Director  will evaluate documentation submitted pursuant to SCC  14.24.420 (2) and condition permit approvals to minimize the risk on both the  subject property  and affected adjacent properties. All conditions must be based on known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment. Evaluation of geotechnical reports may also constitute grounds for denial of the proposal.

             (i)    No  residential structures  will be permitted in  geologically hazardous areas  or their  buffers  if that hazard cannot be fully mitigated.

             (2)     Landslide  or Erosion Hazard  Buffer  Reduction.  Buffers  of  landslide  or  erosion hazard areas  may be reduced to a minimum of 10 feet for development meeting all of the following criteria:

             (a)    No  reasonable alternative  to  buffer  reduction exists; and

             (b)    A  site assessment  is submitted and certifies that:

             (i)    There is a minimal hazard in the vicinity of the proposed development as proven by evidence of no  landslide  activity in the past; and

             (ii)    A quantitative slope stability analysis indicates no significant risk to the  development proposal  and adjacent properties; or the geologically hazardous area can be modified; or the  development proposal  can be designed so that the hazard is eliminated. The quantitative analysis must include the minimum  setback  allowed for development as indicated by a slope stability model with respect to a minimum factor of safety of 1.5 for static conditions, 1.25 for seismic conditions, or 10 feet, whichever results in the greater  setback . The elements of the quantitative  site assessment  will be determined by the  Director  and may include one or more of the following:

             (A)    Subsurface exploration, to include at least one boring with sample collection for laboratory analysis.

             (B)    Laboratory analysis will assess the soil characteristics and include sieve analysis, moisture, angle of internal friction, and cohesion.

             (C)    Utilizing the information from the subsurface exploration and laboratory analysis, the quantitative  site assessment  must include slope stability modeling with factor of safety analysis. The analysis must indicate the factor of safety within 50 feet of the top and toe of geologic hazards; and

             (iii)    The development will not significantly increase  surface water  discharge or sedimentation to adjacent properties beyond  pre-development conditions ; and

             (iv)    The development will not decrease slope stability on adjacent properties; and

             (v)    Such alterations will not adversely impact other  critical areas .

             (3)    Failed  Mitigation Plans .  Mitigation plans  which do not fulfill the performance requirement based on the site assessment/geotechnical report findings or otherwise fail to meet the intent of this Chapter must be revised and the subject development brought into compliance with the revised  mitigation plan .

             (4)     Mitigation Plan  Verification. Upon completion of the project, a  qualified professional  will verify that the  mitigation plan  has been properly implemented. The verification will be required prior to final approval of the project by the  Director . (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.500  Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area designations.

             (1)     Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas  (FWHCAs) are listed in WAC  365-190-130  and are designated as follows:

             (a)    Areas with which endangered, threatened, and sensitive species have a  primary association ;

             (b)    Habitats and species of local importance that have been designated by the County (Subsection (4) of this Section);

             (c)    All public and private  tidelands  suitable for shellfish harvest;

             (d)    Kelp and eelgrass beds, herring and smelt spawning areas;

             (e)    Naturally occurring  ponds  under 20 acres with submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat as further defined in WAC  365-190-130 (4)(e);

             (f)    Waters of the State as defined by RCW  90.48.020  and typed waters as defined by WAC  222-16-030 ;

             (g)     Lakes ,  ponds , streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a governmental or Tribal entity;

             (h)    Areas with which  anadromous fish  species have a  primary association ;

             (i)    State natural area preserves and natural resource conservation areas;

             (j)    Other aquatic resource areas;

             (k)    Forage fish spawning areas;

             (l)    State priority habitats and areas associated with State  priority species  as defined in WAC  365-190-080  or documented in the Washington State  Department  of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitats and Species List; and

             (m)    Areas of rare plant species and high quality ecosystems as identified by the Washington State  Department  of Natural Resources through the Natural Heritage Program in RCW Chapter  79.70 .

             (2)    In addition to the FWHCAs identified in Subsection (1) of this Section, additional habitats and species of local importance may be designated by the  Director  based on declining populations, sensitivity to habitat manipulation, or special value including but not limited to commercial, game, or public  appeal .

             (3)    In order to nominate an area or a species to the category of habitats and species of local importance, an individual or organization must:

             (a)    Demonstrate a need for special consideration based on:

             (i)    Declining population;

             (ii)    Sensitivity to habitat manipulation; or

             (iii)    Commercial or game value or other special value, such as public  appeal ; and

             (b)    Propose relevant management strategies considered effective and within the scope of this Chapter; and

             (c)    Provide species habitat location(s) on a map (scale 1:24,000). Submitted proposals will be reviewed by the  Director  and forwarded to the  Departments  of Fish and Wildlife, Natural Resources, and/or other local and State agencies or experts for comments and recommendations regarding accuracy of data and effectiveness of proposed management strategies.

             Skagit County will hold a  public hearing  for proposals found to be complete, accurate, potentially effective, and within the scope of this Chapter. Approved nominations will become designated “habitats/species of local importance” and will be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

             (4)    The following species and habitats have been designated on a site-specific basis according to the Washington  Department  of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitats and Species List, 2023 or as amended, and/or the County’s List of Habitats and Species of Local Importance:

             (a)    Great blue heron nest sites;

             (b)    Vaux’s swifts communal roosts;

             (c)    Pileated woodpecker nest sites;

             (d)    Osprey nest sites;

             (e)    Townsend big-eared bat communal roosts;

             (f)    Cavity nesting duck breeding areas;

             (g)    Trumpeter swan concentrations;

             (h)    Harlequin duck breeding areas;

             (i)    Waterfowl concentrations. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.510  Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area water type classification.

             Water types must be classified according to WAC  222-16-030 . Type S streams include  shorelines of the State  and have flows averaging 20 or more cubic feet per second; Type F streams are those that are not Type S but still provide fish habitat; and Type N streams do not have fish habitat and are either perennial (Np) or seasonal (Ns). All streams are those areas where  surface waters  flow sufficiently to produce a defined channel or bed as indicated by hydraulically sorted sediments or the removal of vegetative litter or loosely rooted vegetation by the action of moving water. Ns waters must be physically connected by an above-ground channel system to Type S, F, or Np waters. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.520  Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area site assessment requirements.

             Any project within 200 feet of a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area outside the special flood hazard area (SFHA) or within the protected review area as defined in SCC  14.34.055  requires a FWHCA  site assessment . In addition to the requirements of SCC  14.24.080 , the following must be included in the site assessment:

             (1)     Functions and values  analysis, which includes but is not limited to a discussion of water quality/quantity and fish and wildlife habitat; and

             (2)    An analysis of the  buffer  areas above the  ordinary high water mark  including:

             (a)    Recruitment of large woody debris (LWD) to the stream;

             (b)    Shade;

             (c)    Bank integrity (root reinforcement);

             (d)    Runoff filtration;

             (e)    Wildlife habitat;

             (f)    Microclimate;

             (g)    Nutrient inputs.

             (3)    Bald eagle habitats must be protected pursuant to the Federal Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act and the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, as revised; a cooperative habitat management plan must be developed in coordination with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service with support from the Washington  Department  of Fish and Wildlife whenever activities that alter habitat are proposed near a verified nest territory or communal roost.

             (4)    All other  fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas , including habitats and species of local importance, must be protected on a case-by-case basis by means of a habitat management plan based on information from the Washington State Priority Habitat and Species (PHS) program, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and other applicable agencies, as set forth in the  site assessment  requirements in SCC  14.24.080  and this Section. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20110008 (part): Ord. O20090011 Attch. 2 (part): Ord. 17938 Attch. F (part), 2000)

        14.24.530  Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area protection standards.

             (1)    Riparian Management  Zone . Riparian management  zones  apply only to streams and rivers.

             (a)    Intent of  buffers  is to act as riparian management  zones . The intent of riparian management  zones  is to protect the following basic functions:

             (i)    Recruitment of large woody debris (LWD) to the stream. LWD creates habitat  structures  necessary to maintain salmon/trout and other aquatic organisms’ productive capacity and species diversity.

             (ii)    Shade. Shading by the forest canopy maintains cooler water temperatures and influences the availability of oxygen for salmon/trout and other aquatic organisms.

             (iii)    Bank Integrity (Root Reinforcement). Bank integrity helps maintain habitat quality and water quality by reducing bank erosion and creating habitat  structure  and in-stream hiding cover for salmon/trout and other aquatic organisms.

             (iv)    Runoff  Pollutant  Removal. Riparian management  zones  reduce nonpoint source  pollutants , including nutrients and sediments in runoff (surface and shallow subsurface flows) through biogeochemical cycles that help maintain water quality.

             (v)    Wildlife Habitat. Functional wildlife habitat for riparian-dependent species is based on sufficient amounts of riparian vegetation to provide protection for nesting and feeding.

             (vi)    Microclimate. Riparian vegetation creates small-scale microclimates upon which plants, fish, and wildlife depend.

             (vii)    Nutrient Inputs. Riparian vegetation supports substantial populations of insects, which are important for the diet of marine fishes like juvenile salmon.

             (viii)    Wildlife Habitat Connectivity.  Riparian areas  serve as critical corridors that allow terrestrial wildlife to move between habitats. These corridors support biodiversity by facilitating species migration, dispersal, foraging, and access to water.

             (b)    Standard Riparian  Buffers  Measurement. Riparian  buffer  areas are measured horizontally in a landward direction from the  ordinary high water mark . Where a stream  buffer  is within a continuous slope of 30 percent or greater, the  buffer  must include such sloping areas. Where the horizontal  distance  of the sloping area is greater than the required standard  buffer , the  buffer  must be extended to a point 25 feet beyond the top of the bank of the sloping area.  Riparian areas  do not extend beyond the toe of the slope on the landward side of existing  dikes  or levees within established  dike  districts along the Skagit and Samish Rivers.

             (c)    Standard Riparian  Buffer  Widths.  Riparian areas  have the following standard  buffer  widths:

                         DNR Water Type

                         Riparian  Buffer

                         S

                         200 feet

                         F

                         150 feet

                         Np

                         100 feet

                         Ns

                         100 feet

             (i)    Standard riparian  buffer  widths presume the  buffer  is densely vegetated with a native plant community appropriate for the ecoregion, consisting of an average of 80 percent native cover comprised of trees, shrubs and groundcover plants. If the existing  buffer  is sparsely vegetated or vegetated with invasive species, the  buffer  must either be enhanced through an approved  mitigation plan  or increased by 33 percent or to a 100-foot minimum, whichever is greater.

             (d)    A 15-foot-wide  structure  setback is required from the upland edge of the entire riparian management  zone  to provide an area for construction and maintenance of  buildings  and other  structures . This  distance  may be modified with approval of the  Director . The following may be allowed within the  structure  setback:

             (i)    Landscaping with non-invasive species only;

             (ii)     Building  overhangs if such overhangs do not extend more than 18 inches into the  setback  area;

             (iii)    Impervious ground surfaces, such as  driveways  and patios; provided, that such improvements may be subject to special  drainage  provisions adopted for the various  critical areas ; and

             (iv)     Trails .

             (2)     Lake  and Marine Shoreline  Buffers .  Lake  and marine shoreline areas have the following standard  buffer  widths, based on the shoreline area designations defined in the  Shoreline Master Program  (SCC Chapter  14.26 ):

                         Shoreline Area Designations

                         Shoreline  Buffer

                         Natural

                         200 feet

                         Conservancy

                         150 feet

                         Rural

                         100 feet

                         Rural Residential

                         100 feet

                         Urban

                         140 feet

             Natural  Ponds  Less Than 20 Acres. One hundred feet if non-fish-bearing, 150 feet if fish-bearing.

             (3)    Where a  buffer  has been previously established after June 13, 1996, through a County  development review  and is permanently recorded on title or placed within a separate tract or easement, the  buffer  will be as previously established provided:

             (a)    It is equal to or greater than 50 percent of the current required standard  buffer  width for the water type classification; and

             (b)    It is densely vegetated with native plants and invasive plant cover is low; or it is restored to meet vegetated  buffer  standards (Subsection (1)(c)(i) of this Section); and

             (c)    If stream location or ordinary high-water mark has changed since the previous review, additional review should occur.

             If Subsections (3)(a) through (3)(c) of this Section are not met, then current riparian  buffer  widths per Subsection (1) of this Section apply. Additional review may be requested by the  applicant  or required by the  Director  to determine whether or not conditions on site have changed resulting in the previously established  buffer  no longer being applicable. If Subsection (3)(a) of this Section cannot be met, the  Director  may allow the  buffer  to be as previously established, provided the proposed development does not expand beyond the previously approved area of impact.

             (4)    Where a legally established and constructed public roadway, private roadway, or other legally established development functionally isolates a riparian  buffer , the  Department  may approve a modification of the standard  buffer  width to the edge of the development, provided:

             (a)    The isolated part of the  buffer  does not provide additional protection of the  riparian area ; and

             (b)    The isolated part of the  buffer  provides insignificant biological, geological or hydrological  buffer  functions relating to the  riparian area ; and

             (c)    If the resulting  buffer  distance is less than 50 percent of the standard  buffer  for the applicable stream type or shoreline designation, no further reduction will be allowed;

             (d)    The legally established development includes  hard surfaces  a minimum of 20 feet wide that completely isolate the  project area  from the critical area.

             (5)    On  development proposal  sites involving  land division , long plat, and/or a  binding site plan , that contain streams and/or  wetlands  with a habitat score greater than or equal to six, that are also located within 200 feet of an on-site or off-site stream and/or  wetland  with a habitat score greater than or equal to six, a fish and wildlife habitat corridor must be set aside and protected as follows:

             (a)    New  development proposals ,  subdivisions ,  short subdivisions , commercial  site plans , and  binding site plans  must place the corridor in a contiguous permanent critical area tract with all developable  lots  sited on the remaining portion of the project site.

             (b)    The fish and wildlife habitat corridor must be sited on the development in order to meet the following conditions, where feasible:

             (i)    Forms one contiguous tract that connects on-site high value habitat areas to other on-site or off-site high value habitat areas;

             (ii)    New  development proposals  must provide a minimum fish and wildlife habitat corridor width of 100 feet or a corridor width that is consistent with an approved habitat management plan. The corridor width should not be less than 100 feet wide at any point;

             (iii)    New  development proposals  on sites constrained by a fish and wildlife habitat corridor and where development already exists must maintain a minimum fish and wildlife habitat corridor width of 100 feet unless, through an approved habitat management plan, it can be shown that a lesser habitat corridor width supports and maintains the corridor’s function and value;

             (iv)    Be contiguous with and include and/or connect  critical areas ,  buffers , wildlife habitat corridors, native growth protection easements, and  open space  tracts or wooded areas on site or on adjacent properties, if present; and

             (v)    The  Director  may modify corridor widths based on supporting documentation from an approved habitat management plan.

             (c)    A management plan for the wildlife corridor contained within a tract or tracts must be prepared that specifies the permissible extent of recreation,  forestry  or other uses compatible with preserving and enhancing the wildlife habitat value of the tract or tracts. The management plan must be reviewed and approved by the  Department . The approved management plan for a  development proposal  must be contained within and recorded on title or with the covenants, conditions and restrictions (CCRs). If the wildlife corridor is contained in a  conservation easement , a management plan is not required, but may be submitted to the  Department  for review and approval and recorded with the  conservation easement .

             (d)     Clearing  within the wildlife corridor contained in a tract or tracts will be limited to that allowed by the management plan or as otherwise allowed by this Chapter. No  clearing , including the removal of woody debris, will be allowed within a wildlife corridor contained within a  conservation easement  on individual  lots , unless the  property owner  has an approved management plan.

             (e)    Where feasible, a homeowners’ association or other entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation must be established to monitor and assure compliance with the management plan. The association must provide homeowners with information on the Washington  Department  of Fish and Wildlife’s backyard wildlife sanctuary program.

             (f)    Low impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat corridor and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the corridor depending on the sensitivity of the habitat area. Examples of uses and activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases include  trails  that are pervious, viewing platforms,  stormwater  management facilities such as grass-lined swales, utility easements and other similar uses, or activities otherwise described and approved by the Washington  Department  of Fish and Wildlife; provided, that any impacts to the corridor resulting from such permitted facilities shall be fully mitigated.

             (g)    At the discretion of the  Director , these standards may be waived or reduced for public facilities such as public schools, fire stations, public  parks , and public  road  projects.

             (h)    The wildlife corridor tract or easement must be permanently marked and/or fenced consistent with the methods contained in SCC  14.24.090  and the County’s design and construction standards in effect at the time of  application . (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20090011 Attch. 2 (part); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.540  Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area performance-based buffer alternatives and mitigation standards.

             (1)     Buffer  Width Increasing. The  Director  may require the standard  buffer  width to be increased or to establish habitat corridors, when such  buffers  are necessary for one of the following:

             (a)    To protect priority fish or wildlife using the FWHCA.

             (b)    To provide connectivity when a Type S or F water body is located within 300 feet of:

             (i)    Another Type S or F water body; or

             (ii)    A FWHCA; or

             (iii)    A Category I, II or III  wetland ;

             (iv)    To protect habitat corridor connections between  open spaces  and  critical areas  inside and outside the County.

             The increased  buffer  distance may be limited to those areas that provide connectivity or are necessary to protect habitat functions. Increasing the  buffer  widths will only be done where necessary to preserve the  structure , function and value of the habitat.

             (2)     Buffer  Width Averaging.  Buffer  width averaging allows limited reductions of  buffer  width in specified locations, while requiring increases in others. Prior to considering  buffer  averaging, the  applicant  must demonstrate  application  of mitigation sequencing as required in SCC  14.24.080 . Averaging of required  buffer  widths will be allowed only where the  applicant  demonstrates to the  Director  that all of the following criteria are met:

             (a)    Averaging is necessary to accomplish the purpose of the proposal and no  reasonable alternative  is available; and

             (b)    The habitat contains variations in sensitivity due to existing physical characteristics; and

             (c)    Averaging will not adversely impact the  functions and values  of  fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas ; and

             (d)    Averaging meets  performance standards  for protecting fish species; and

             (e)    The total area contained within the  buffer  after averaging is no less than that contained within the standard  buffer  prior to averaging; and

             (f)    The  buffer  width will not be reduced below 75 percent of the standard  buffer  width;

             (g)     Compensatory mitigation  is provided to address degraded  buffer .

             (3)     Buffer  Width Decreasing.  Buffer  widths may only be decreased as part of a reasonable use exception or  variance  request pursuant to SCC  14.24.140  or  14.24.150 . Prior to considering  buffer  reductions, the  applicant  must demonstrate  application  of mitigation sequencing as required in SCC  14.24.080 . In all circumstances where a substantial portion of the remaining  buffer  is degraded, the  buffer  reduction plan will include replanting with  native vegetation  in the degraded portions of the remaining  buffer  area and must include a five-year monitoring and maintenance plan.

             (4)    Allowed Uses in FWHCAs or  Buffers . The following activities may be permitted within FWHCAs, provided the activities comply with SCC  14.24.080 ,  14.24.520 , and SCC Chapter  14.34 , where applicable.

             (a)     Roads , Bridges,  Driveways  and Utilities.  Road , bridge,  driveway  and utility construction may be permitted across a FWHCA and/or its  buffer  under the following conditions:

             (i)    It is demonstrated to the  Director  that there are no alternative routes that can be reasonably used to achieve the proposed development; and

             (ii)    The activity will have minimum adverse impact to the FWHCA; and

             (iii)    The activity will not significantly degrade surface or  groundwater ; and

             (iv)    The intrusion into the FWHCA and its  buffers  is fully mitigated;

             (v)    The need for placing a  driveway  within an FWHCA  buffer  was not created by a development action or  land division  after June, 13, 1996;

             (vi)    A  mitigation plan  prepared by a  qualified professional  demonstrating compliance with mitigation sequencing is provided and approved by the  Director .

             (b)    Docks. Docks designed to facilitate low-impact uses, such as education and/or private, noncommercial recreation, may be permitted within FWHCAs when a FWHCA report prepared by a  qualified professional  demonstrates that the project meets the following conditions:

             (i)    The activity will have minimum adverse impact to the FWHCA; and

             (ii)    The activity will not significantly degrade surface or  groundwater ; and

             (iii)    The intrusion into the FWHCA and its  buffers  is fully mitigated; and

             (iv)    The activity must be consistent with the provisions of SCC Chapter  14.26 .

             (c)    Bulkheads. Bulkheads designed to protect existing single-family residences may be permitted within FWHCAs if a FWHCA report prepared by a  qualified professional  demonstrates that the project meets the following conditions:

             (i)    The activity will have minimum adverse impact to the FWHCA; and

             (ii)    The activity will not significantly degrade surface or  groundwater ; and

             (iii)    The intrusion into the FWHCA must be fully mitigated; and

             (iv)    The activity must be consistent with the provisions of SCC Chapter  14.26 .

             (d)    Limited  park  or recreational access to an FWHCA or its required  buffer ; provided, that a FWHCA report prepared by a  qualified professional  demonstrates that the project meets the following conditions:

             (i)    The access is part of a public  park  or a recreational resort development that is dependent on the access for its location and recreational function; and

             (ii)    The access is limited to the minimum necessary to accomplish the recreational function; and

             (iii)    The access and the balance of the development are consistent with other requirements of SCC Title  14 ; and

             (iv)    The proponent obtains written approval from the County for the limited access and associated mitigation.

             (e)    Low-impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the  buffer  and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the  buffer  depending on the sensitivity of the habitat involved; provided, that such activity will not result in a decrease in riparian  functions and values  and will not prevent or inhibit the  buffer ’s recovery to at least pre-altered condition or function. Examples of uses and activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases, as long as the activity does not retard the overall recovery of the  buffer , include removal of noxious vegetation, pedestrian  trails ,  structures  under 200 square feet in public or publicly managed  parks  that are in accordance with  park  management goals and designed to conserve the natural character of the landscape, and viewing platforms less than 200 square feet in size which may be covered but not enclosed.

             (f)     Stormwater  discharges must be controlled and treated in accordance with currently adopted the  Stormwater Management Manual  for Western Washington (2024 or as revised).

             (g)    To allow for greater flexibility in a  development proposal , an  applicant  has the opportunity to remove  timber  within the standard  buffer  widths shown above if the  applicant ’s mitigation measures incorporate all of the  performance standards  based upon water type listed in the table below. In conformance with professional standards used by the Washington  Department  of Natural Resources for  forest practices  in sensitive areas, all removal of  timber  within FWHCA  buffers  will be subject to conditioning specified by the  Director  in conjunction with an on-site technical team review in which participation by representatives of the proponent,  Ecology , WDFW, WDNR and natural resource representatives of affected Indian tribes is solicited. No net loss of ecological functions must be demonstrated through the critical area report process.

             The intent of this Section is to provide an additional opportunity for an  applicant  to propose some level of  timber  removal within the riparian habitat  zone , as long as it can be demonstrated that the function of the  buffer  can be maintained at the levels described below. If the  buffer , in its current state, cannot meet these standards, then the  Director  will not be able to give its approval for any activity which would inhibit recovery of or degrade the current  buffer .

             The current performance of a given  buffer  area is compared to its potential performance as rated by the Soil Conservation Service,  Soil Survey of Skagit County , 1989. In consultation with a representative from the Natural Resource Conservation Service, Soil Conservation District or professional forester, the  applicant  will determine the capability of the site for woodland management, using the most suitable tree species according to the soil survey, and establish the stand characteristics that would be expected from a mature stand of those species established on site.

             If the current stand can exceed the riparian protection that could be expected based on site potential, then additional activity may be allowed provided the following  performance standards  can be met. For Type S streams, an alternative method may be utilized to allow limited  timber  harvest within the outer 100 feet of a buffer:

                     PERFORMANCE-BASED RIPARIAN STANDARDS*

                      (These standards must be exceeded before additional activity can be permitted within the riparian  zone .)

                         Watertype

                          Performance Standards

                         Type S

                         Maintain 95% of total LWD recruitment expected to enter the stream from a mature stand; and

                         Maintain 85% of the trees which are greater than 24 inches DBH within 100 feet of stream; and

                         Maintain an average of 75% canopy cover (based on canopy densitometer readings at stream edge).

                         The  applicant  may further request some limited  timber  harvest of up to 30% of the merchantable  timber  within the outer 100 feet of any 200-foot required  buffer  provided the harvest:

                         (a) Does not reduce the LWD and canopy requirements; and

                         (b) The  applicant  will increase the total  buffer  size by 50 feet to mitigate for the limited  timber  harvest in the required  buffer  to provide additional wildlife habitat. The additional 50-foot  buffer  must retain a minimum of 50% of the total number of trees with 25% of the total trees left having a diameter at breast height (DBH—4-1/2 feet) greater than 12 inches; and

                         (c) No more than 50% of the dominant trees in the outer 100 feet may be harvested.

                         Type F

                         Maintain 85% of total LWD recruitment expected to enter the stream from a mature stand; and

                         Maintain 85% of the trees which are greater than 18 inches DBH within 100 feet of stream; and

                         Maintain an average of 75% canopy cover (based on canopy densitometer readings at stream edge).

                         Types Np and Ns

                         Maintain 50% of total LWD recruitment expected to enter the stream from a mature stand; and

                         Maintain 85% of the trees which are greater than 24 inches DBH within 50 feet of stream; and

                         Maintain an average of 75% canopy cover (based on canopy densitometer readings at stream edge).

             *    Note:  Applicants  electing to employ performance-based mitigation in accordance with the above matrix must include appropriate analysis and justification in their site assessment/habitat management plan.

             (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20110008 (part): Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.600  Frequently flooded areas designations.

              Frequently flooded areas  are designated as those areas identified as A, AO, AH, A1—10, A12, A14, A16, A18, A21—22, V1 and V4  zones  on the official Flood Insurance Rate Map for Skagit County, as amended. Cumulatively these  zones  represent the floodway and 100-year floodplain. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.610  Frequently flooded areas initial project review.

             Project review will be conducted in accordance with the procedures and requirements for reviewing an  application  for a permit under SCC Chapter  14.34  as amended. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.620  Frequently flooded areas development requirements.

             Development criteria and associated engineering requirements for  frequently flooded areas  will be addressed under the provisions of Chapter  14.34  SCC. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.630  Frequently flooded areas protection standards.

             (1)    All development must conform to the provisions of SCC Chapter  14.34  and the International  Building  Code, which contain structural safeguards to reduce risk to human life, health and property from flooding.

             (2)    Any use or development must not alter the normal movement of  surface water  in a manner that would cause the unnatural diversion of floodwater to otherwise flood-free areas.

             (3)    The  applicant  must demonstrate that the development is not likely to adversely affect species protected under the  Endangered Species  Act, consistent with the provisions of SCC Chapter  14.34  and this Chapter. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20110008 (part); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.700  Compliance tracking.

             (1)    The  Director  will undertake a coordinated system of compliance tracking to ensure that conditions of approval, mitigation requirements, and required landowner maintenance and/or monitoring responsibilities are being met.

             (2)    Compliance tracking efforts must include complaint-driven  site visits  and review on an annual basis by a representative monitoring of projects or activities having received  critical areas  approval a minimum of 10 months prior to the monitoring date. Results of such monitoring must be included in the permanent record for the project or activity and must be utilized for enforcement purposes.

             (3)    If, based on compliance tracking efforts, the  Director  discovers violations of this Chapter, such violations will be subject to the enforcement provisions set forth under SCC Chapter  14.44  in addition to any other remedies available to the County.

             (4)    If the  Director  determines that increased compliance tracking is warranted based on unacceptably high levels of noncompliance, the number of projects or activities to be monitored will be increased. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.710  Fees.

              Repealed by Ord. O20250011.  (Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.720  Director.

             (1)    The  Director  will administer and enforce this Chapter. The  Director  will apply the provisions of this Chapter consistent with the Washington State Growth Management Act, the Skagit County  Comprehensive Plan , the Skagit County Countywide Planning Policies and the goals of this Chapter. In all instances where administrative discretion is exercised, the  Director  must document the basis for such determinations. Such documentation must be included in the official file for the proposed project or activity and be made available to the public upon request.

             (2)    If the  Director  finds that any of the provisions of this Chapter are being violated, he or she must notify, in writing, the  person  responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The  Director  must take all actions authorized by this Chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions, including referring violations to the prosecutor’s office. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.730  Appeals from the Director.

             Any decision made by the  Director  pursuant to this Chapter may be appealed as permitted by SCC Chapter  14.06 . (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20080014 (part))

        14.24.740  Interdisciplinary team.

             The  Director , Hearing Examiner, or other appropriate  hearing body  may, as they deem necessary, utilize an interdisciplinary team to provide technical assistance where necessary to assess a proposal or make a determination.

             (1)    Members of the interdisciplinary team will be selected by the  Director , Hearing Examiner or appropriate  hearing body . Selection of the team must include the proponents (upon their request) and local, State, Tribal or Federal representatives with expertise in the field and/or independent professionals with expertise relating to the  critical areas  issue.

             (2)    The functions of the interdisciplinary team are to field-check and verify  critical areas  determinations by reviewing the information included with an  application , identify areas of concern, and help focus the preparation of subsequent reports and environmental documentation on the most relevant issues.

             (3)    The  Director , Hearing Examiner or appropriate  hearing body  will coordinate this effort and pursue a consensus process in seeking advice from the team.

             (4)    A complete public record will be maintained of written opinions submitted by individual team members. (Ord. O20250011 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20080014 (part))