Chapter 14.25 LANDSCAPING

         Chapter 14.25
LANDSCAPING

             Sections:

              14.25.010    Purpose.

              14.25.020    Applicability.

              14.25.030    Application requirements.

              14.25.040    General standards.

              14.25.050    Type I, property lines other than street frontage.

              14.25.060    Type II, property lines other than street frontage.

              14.25.070    Type III, street frontage.

              14.25.080    Type III, street frontage in RVC in Alger.

              14.25.090    Type IV, parking areas.

              14.25.100    Type V, industrial adjoining residential in Bayview Ridge.

        14.25.010  Purpose.

             (1)    Landscaping is essential to provide an aesthetically pleasing balance between the built and natural environment for the residents of Skagit County. Landscaping should be used to help:

             (a)    Soften and enhance the appearance of the built environment and retain the natural landscape character where possible and practical;

             (b)     Buffer  conflicting land uses;

             (c)    Maintain property values;

             (d)    Provide shade and visual relief to parking areas and  streets ;

             (e)    Reduce  stormwater  runoff and erosion by providing areas for water retention and biofiltration where deemed necessary;

             (f)    Aid in protecting the natural landscape  rural character  of Skagit County by helping to maintain and enhance the rural visual landscape quality through the use of native plant materials;

             (g)    Avoid danger to aircraft in the AEO  zone . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.25.020  Applicability.

             (1)    This Chapter applies to:

             (a)    Any change of use;

             (b)    New or  replacement  commercial, industrial, or institutional  building ;

             (c)    Special use; or

             (d)     Land division  application (when required by Division 7 of this Title).

             (2)    For a new  structure  or use, substantial  remodel ,  repair , or expansion (greater than 50 percent area) of an existing  building  or use, landscaping must meet all requirements of this Chapter.

             (3)    For a  remodel ,  repair , or expansion (50 percent or less) to an existing  building  or use, landscaping is required at least equal to the percentage of the remodeled, repaired, or expanded area.

             (4)    No landscaping is required for an interior  remodel .

             (5)    No additional landscaping is required for a property that already meets the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.25.030  Application requirements.

             (1)    A conceptual landscape plan must be included in the underlying  project permit  application.

             (2)    Plans must be drawn to scale and include:

             (a)    The location of  buildings ;

             (b)    Above- and belowground utilities;

             (c)    The location, quantities, and sizes of proposed plants and other proposed materials in the landscape area.

             (3)    Plans for projects including 2,000 square feet or more of landscaping over the entire development area must be prepared by a licensed landscape architect or Washington State certified nurseryman.

             (4)    A final, approved plan is required prior to final project approval. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.25.040  General standards.

             The following general standards are required in all  zones  where landscaping is required:

             (1)    Existing Vegetation. Preference is to retain as much of the existing mature vegetation (not including invasive nonnative species) as possible within planting areas. Existing mature vegetation may be included in the required amount.

             (2)    Trees must be varieties that will not conflict with underground or overhead utilities.

             (3)    No artificial lawn or shrubbery is permitted in landscaped areas.

             (4)    Required landscaping or other vegetation within 30 feet of a  driveway  or  street  intersection must not impair the sight vision between 30 inches and eight feet from the ground. All trees must not have branches or foliage below eight feet above the  street  level.

             (5)    Erosion control measures and  temporary  runoff control may become part of a landscape plan.

             (6)    Maintenance for all landscaping and screening areas must be provided by the owner of the landscaped property. Broken or dead trees or shrubs must be replaced. All screening and landscaping areas must be kept free of weeds and trash. Failure to maintain landscaping areas may be enforced per SCC Chapter  14.09 , Enforcement Procedures.

             (7)    Performance assurance bonding must be in a cash deposit or other assurance acceptable to the County equal to 125 percent of the estimated installation costs if landscaping improvements have not been completed prior to  application  for occupancy. Such deposit must be accompanied by a letter that must stipulate the completion of the landscaping no later than nine months from date of occupancy. If the conditions are not met, the County may use the deposit to perform the landscaping.

             (8)    Phased projects must submit a landscape plan for the site as a whole before any issuance of a  building permit  is granted.

             (9)    Alternative landscape plans that differ from the requirements contained in this Chapter may be approved as a  variance . All plans must demonstrate how they meet the intent as outlined in this Chapter or that a hardship exists because of  lot  topography, size, or location.

             (10)    Landscape materials must be provided consistent with the County’s list of acceptable landscape materials.

             (11)    Potential conflicts between landscaping and utilities must be minimized or avoided.

             (12)    Where a  low-impact development  stormwater facility is required by SCC Chapter  14.32 , the  applicant  may use that facility to satisfy other landscaping requirements so long as the purpose and intent of required landscaping is satisfied and the landscaping does not disrupt the function of  LID  stormwater facilities. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.25.050  Type I, property lines other than street frontage.

             (1)    Description. Type I landscaping is intended to provide screening of areas to reduce the visual impact of incompatible or less desirable characteristics. It is intended to be a very dense sight barrier. The planting strip must be at least 20 feet wide.

             (2)    Applicability.

             (a)    A 20-foot-wide Type I  buffer  is required on all development within SRT, BR-LI, BR-HI, NRI, and RMI  zones  where it abuts URR, RI, RRv, RVR, BR-R, H-URv and R zoned land. Entire property lines need not be landscaped if  applicant  can demonstrate the activity (building or use) is adequately screened and agrees to additional Type I landscaping with future  applications . A request for a reduction must be by  administrative decision  pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.06 . Requirements for the NRI  zone  are found within that  zone .

             (b)    Type I landscapes may be applied as conditions to discretionary land use  applications .

             (3)    Amount of Plantings Within the Planting Strip.

             (a)    Trees. Two alternating rows of evergreen trees, with a minimum of two-and-one-half-inch caliper and planted at intervals of no greater than 20 feet on center. The trees must be backed by a sight-obscuring  fence , a minimum of five feet high, that may be removed when the trees reach 10 feet high.  Applicant  may eliminate the  fence  by increasing the required width of the planting area by 10 feet. In the Airport Environs Overlay (AEO), tree height at maturity may be no greater than the maximum  building  height for the specific site.

             (b)    Shrubs. Shrubs must be planted a minimum of five feet wide using plants that are three and one-half feet in height at the time of planting. A combination of plant materials and landscape materials must be planted so that the ground surrounding the shrubs will be covered within three years.

             (c)    Alternatively, a wall at least six feet high may be used for screening to reduce the planting width five feet and must be constructed of masonry, block, or textured concrete. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.25.060  Type II, property lines other than street frontage.

             (1)    Description. Type II landscaping is intended to provide a visual separation between uses and land use districts.

             (2)    Applicability.

             (a)    A 10-foot-wide Type II  buffer  is required on all development within URC-I, AVR, AVR-L, RFS, RVC, RC, SSB, and RB  zones  where it abuts URR, RI, RRv, RVR, BR-R, H-URv and R zoned land. Entire property lines need not be landscaped if  applicant  can demonstrate the activity (building or use) is adequately screened and agrees to additional Type II landscaping with future  applications . A request for a reduction must be by  administrative decision  pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.06 .

             (b)    Type II landscapes may be applied as conditions to discretionary land use  applications .

             (3)    Amount of Plantings.

             (a)    Trees. Evergreen and deciduous trees, with no more than 50 percent being deciduous, a minimum of two-and-one-half-inch caliper and planted at intervals of no greater than 20 feet on center. In the Airport Environs Overlay (AEO), tree height at maturity must be no greater than the maximum  building  height for the specific site.

             (b)    Shrubs. A minimum of three and one-half feet in height and other plant materials planted so that the ground will be covered within three years. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.25.070  Type III, street frontage.

             (1)    Description. Type III landscaping is intended to provide aesthetic  enhancement , retain the natural landscape character and soften the appearance of  streets , parking areas and  building  elevations of  applications  subject to this Section. This is the typical landscape requirement that every commercial/industrial  application  must meet.

             (2)    Applicability.

             (a)    An eight-foot-wide Type III  buffer  is required on the  street  frontage of all development within all commercial/industrial  zones . Entire property lines need not be landscaped if the  applicant  can demonstrate the activity (building or use) is adequately screened and agrees to additional Type II landscaping with future  applications . A request for a reduction must be by  administrative decision  pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.06 .

             (b)    Type III landscapes may be applied as conditions to discretionary land use  applications .

             (3)    Amount of Plantings.

             (a)    Standards for AVR, AVR-L, NRI, BR-LI, BR-HI, RFS, SRT, and RMI  Zones .

             (i)    Trees. Evergreen and deciduous trees, with no more than 50 percent being deciduous, a minimum of six feet in height, and planted at intervals no greater than 30 feet on center, or maximum spacing of one tree for every 30 feet of  road  frontage may be planted in groupings so as not to visually block a business entrance. In the Airport Environs Overlay (AEO), tree height at maturity must be no greater than the maximum  building  height for the specific site.

             (ii)    Shrubs and Berms. Minimum of three and one-half feet in height, and lawn or ground cover planted so that the ground will be covered within three years or earth mounding (berms) an average of three and one-half feet in height planted with shrubs, or ground cover so that the ground will be covered within three years and produce a landscape at least three and one-half feet in height.

             (b)    Standards for URC-I, RVC, RC, SSB, and R  Zones .

             (i)    A minimum of two groupings 50 square feet each must be provided.

             (ii)    A minimum of one tree in one group and two trees in the second group.

             (iii)    Shrubs must be adequate to cover the minimum square footage requirement. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.25.080  Type III, street frontage in RVC in Alger.

             (1)    Description. Type III landscaping is intended to provide aesthetic  enhancement , retain the natural landscape character and soften the appearance of  streets , parking areas and  building  elevations of  applications  subject to this Section.

             (a)    An eight-foot-wide Type III  buffer  is required on the  street  frontage of all development within the Alger RVC  zone .  Stormwater  biofiltration is encouraged to be incorporated into any landscaped area. Parking must be located to the side and rear of  buildings  or in on-street parking lanes. In the  Rural Village  Commercial area north of Alger Cain  Lake  Road, the pathway may be in the outside 20 feet of the 100-foot-wide Old State Route 99  right-of-way .

             (b)    Type III landscapes may be applied as conditions to discretionary land use  applications .

             (2)    Amount of Plantings.

             (a)     Street  trees in the amount of one tree per 30 feet of  street  frontage. All  street  trees must be deciduous. Trees may be grouped informally to enhance the rural environment.

             (b)    Shrubs and ground cover so that the ground will be covered within three years.

             (3)    Pedestrian and Bicycle Pathways.

             (a)     Street  frontage must include a pedestrian pathway at least five feet wide. The pathway may be constructed of crushed rock or asphalt. In the  Rural Village  Commercial area north of Alger Cain  Lake  Road, the pathway may be in the outside 20 feet of the 100-foot-wide Old State Route 99  right-of-way . Bicycle paths north of Alger Cain  Lake  Road must be located within the inner 60-foot  right-of-way . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.25.090  Type IV, parking areas.

             (1)    Description. Type IV landscaping is intended to provide relief and shade in parking areas.

             (2)    Amount of Plantings.  Applications  within RFS, RMI, AVR, AVR-L, NRI, BR-LI, BR-HI, and SRT zoning designations must have a minimum of 16 square feet of landscaping for every parking stall.

             (3)    Design.

             (a)    Each area of landscaping must contain at least 100 square feet of area and must be at least four feet in any direction. The area must contain at least one tree at least six feet in height and with minimum size of one and one-half inches in caliper measured six inches above existing  grade  if deciduous. Deciduous trees must have a clear trunk at least five feet above the ground. The remaining ground area must be landscaped with a variety of plant materials to include low shrubs, two feet at maturity, perennials, annuals and ground cover.

             (b)    A landscaped area must be placed at the end of each parking row in a multiple lane parking area. This area must be at least four feet wide and must extend the length of the adjacent parking stall.

             (c)    If less than six stalls are required, a minimum of 100 square feet must be landscaped. The area does not need to meet the  dimensional standards  of SCC  14.25.080 (3)(a).

             (d)    Up to 100 percent of the trees proposed for the parking area may be deciduous.

             (e)    The trees must be protected from the public, either pedestrian or motor vehicles, by appropriate curbs, tree guards or other protective devices.

             (f)     Applications  Within All Other Commercial/Industrial Zoning Designations. For every 10 required stalls, a minimum of 200 square feet of landscaping must be provided including at least three trees and a mix of shrubs and ground covers. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.25.100  Type V, industrial adjoining residential in Bayview Ridge.

             (1)    Description. Type V landscaping is intended to provide a visual and noise  buffer  of industrial uses where they adjoin residential  zones  at Bayview Ridge.

             (2)    Applicability. Type V landscaping is required along the entire property line for development within BR-LI or AVR-L where it abuts BR-R or RRv.

             (3)    Requirements.

             (a)    Width. Plantings and screening must total 30 feet in width.

             (b)    Plantings.

             (i)    Existing vegetation within the required  buffer  width that functionally meets or exceeds these planting requirements must be retained.

             (ii)    At least three alternating rows of evergreen trees, with a minimum of two-and-one-half-inch caliper and planted at intervals of 20 feet or less on center.

             (iii)    Shrubs must be planted no more than five feet apart using plants that are at least three and one-half feet in height at the time of planting. A combination of plants and landscape materials must be placed so that the ground surrounding the shrubs will be covered within three years.

             (c)    Screening.

             (i)    A masonry, block, or textured concrete wall, or fully obscuring wood  fence  is required and must be architecturally integrated with colors and textures of the surrounding development.

             (ii)    Where existing vegetation exceeds 150 percent of the required landscaping width, no wall or  fence  is required. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))