Chapter 14.29 SIGNS

         Chapter 14.29
SIGNS

             Sections:

              14.29.010    Purpose.

              14.29.020    Definitions.

              14.29.030    Application requirements.

              14.29.040    Maintenance, removal, and nonconforming signs.

              14.29.050    General sign regulations.

              14.29.060    Exempt signs.

              14.29.070    Prohibited signs.

              14.29.080    On-premises signs.

              14.29.090    Commercial business signs.

              14.29.100    Signs advertising industrial businesses.

              14.29.110    Off-premises signs.

        14.29.010  Purpose.

             This Chapter regulates the construction, erection, maintenance, electrification, illumination, type, size, number and locations of  signs  in order to protect the health, safety, property and welfare of the public as well as to ensure that Skagit County retains a neat, orderly and attractive appearance. The intent of these provisions is to preserve and enhance the  rural character , unique scenic beauty and the business, recreational, educational, and tourism potential of the County. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.29.020  Definitions.

             The  sign  definitions in the currently adopted International  Building  Code (Appendix H) are hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.29.030  Application requirements.

             (1)    An  applicant  must file an  application  for a  building permit , where applicable.

             (2)    The  application  must include plans showing:

             (a)    The location by  street  address of the proposed  sign ;

             (b)    Area of the  sign ;

             (c)    Size and character;

             (d)    Method of illumination, if any;

             (e)    The exact location proposed for such  sign ;

             (f)    In the case of a projecting  sign , the proposed method of fastening said  sign  to the  building  structure;

             (g)    The vertical  distance  between such  sign  and the finished  grade ;

             (h)    The horizontal  distance  between such  sign  and the  street  right-of-way;

             (i)    In the case of off-premises  signs , the written consent of the  property owner  for the erection of such  sign ;

             (j)    A description (size, design, illumination) and depiction of the location of other  signs  within 1,000 feet of the proposed  sign . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.29.040  Maintenance, removal, and nonconforming signs.

             (1)     Sign  Maintenance. All  signs  for which a permit is required, including their supports, braces, guys, and anchors must be kept in good condition. Illuminated devices must be maintained in good working order. Permitted  signs  are subject to applicable landscaping requirements of SCC Chapter  14.25 . If the  Building  Official finds any  sign  regulated under this Chapter to be unsafe or unsecured, he or she must give written notice of such findings to the owner, agent, or lessee thereof. If the owner, agent or lessee fails to remove or alter the  sign  so as to comply with the standards herein after 30  days ’ notice, such  sign  or other advertising  structure  may be removed or altered to comply by the  Director  at the expense of the owner, agent, or lessee. Such expense constitutes a lien against the property. The  Director  may cause any  sign  or other advertising  structure  that is an immediate peril to  persons  or property to be removed immediately.

             (2)    Removal of Illegally Established  Signs .  Signs  established in violation of this Chapter may be immediately removed by the  Building  Official under the authority of the adopted  building  code if an immediate health and life safety issue is identified.

             (3)    Removal of Abandoned  Signs . If a  building ,  structure , or premises is abandoned consistent with SCC Chapter  14.07 , the owner of said property is responsible for removing any commercial  sign  or  signs  located thereon with the exception of permitted off-premises  signs  or advertisements associated with the sale or lease of that facility.

             (4)     Nonconforming  Signs.  Nonconforming  signs are regulated as follows:

             (a)    On-Premises  Nonconforming  Signs. Legally established  nonconforming  on-premises  signs  must be allowed to continue consistent with the provisions of SCC Chapter  14.07 .

             (b)    Off-Premises  Nonconforming  Signs.  Nonconforming  off-premises  signs  must comply with the provisions of this Chapter within three years from the date of adoption. Upon failure to comply with the  sign  code within the specified time period, the  Director  may remove such  signs  or enforce this provision pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.09 . Exceptions:

             (i)    Off-premises  signs  established and maintained under a valid special use permit may continue consistent with the conditions of approval.

             (ii)    Off-premises  signs  located along State highways subject to the Highway Advertising Control Act—Scenic Vistas Act, including billboards, may continue consistent with the provisions governing such  signs  under RCW  47.42.107 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.29.050  General sign regulations.

             The following general requirements apply to  sign  regulations in all  zones  in Skagit County.

             (1)    Highway Advertising Control Act—Scenic Vista Act.  Signs  in areas adjacent to State and Federal highways are restricted by RCW Chapter  47.42 .

             (2)    Conformity to Adopted  Building  Codes. All  signs  and other advertising  structures  must be constructed and maintained in strict conformity with  building  code(s) as adopted and referenced in SCC Chapter  15.04 .

             (3)     Building Permits .  Building permits  are required for the erection, alteration, or reconstruction of wall-mounted  signs , electrified  signs  and freestanding  signs  as required by the currently adopted International  Building  Code. Freestanding  signs  less than seven feet in height and wall-mounted  signs  that do not project from the  building  do not require a  building permit . A change in information on the face of an existing  sign  does not constitute an alteration.

             (4)    Identification of Permitted  Signs . The number of the  sign  permit must be painted or otherwise affixed on the  sign  requiring a permit. The permit number must be in letters of not less than one-half inch or more than three inches in height and must be easily visible to the  Building  Official.

             (5)    Sight  Distance .  Signs  must not obstruct  road  sight  distances  within the sight triangle of any intersection in accordance with  Skagit County road standards  and must not be located within a public  right-of-way .

             (6)    Traffic Safety. No  sign  may be erected or allowed that obstructs the sight  distance  along a public  right-of-way . No  sign  may by its location, color or nature, tend to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signals or  signs , or to be confused with a flashing light of an emergency vehicle. In addition, no  sign  may, by its nature or moving parts, tend to confuse motorists, or create any potential hazard to motorists, or use admonitions such as “stop,” “go,” “slow,” “danger,” etc., which might be confused with traffic directional signals.

             (7)    Illumination. Illumination of  signs  must be consistent with the general provisions of this Subsection and maintain the  rural character  of the area.  Signs  must be shaded, shielded or directed so the light intensity or brightness must not adversely affect surrounding properties or public and private rights-of-way or create a hazard or  nuisance  to the traveling public or to surrounding properties. Illumination must be in compliance with SCC Chapter  14.20 , General  Performance Standards .

             (8)    Moving  Signs . No revolving or rotating beacon of light that resembles or simulates any emergency light device must be permitted as part of a  sign . Flashing devices, strobe lights, and searchlights must not be permitted; however, illuminated  signs  are allowed which indicate customary public information. Neon lighting or accent lighting may be used to advertise commercial or industrial businesses provided the lighting is compatible with the surrounding rural development, nearby permitted rural signage and all other signage requirements.

             (9)    Measurement of  Sign  Area. The following method must be utilized in calculating  sign  area:

             (a)    The square footage of a  sign  made up of letters, words or symbols within a frame must be determined from the outside edge of the frame itself.

             (b)    The square footage of a  sign  composed only of letters, words or symbols must be determined from imaginary straight lines drawn around the entire copy or grouping of such letters, words, or symbols.

             (c)    Double or multi-faced  signs  must be calculated as the maximum area visible from any single direction at any point in time.

             (d)    For freestanding  signs , the height must be measured from the elevation of the crown of the nearest public  street  to the highest point of the freestanding  sign  or its supporting  structure .

             (e)     Signs  attached to or painted against the overall  structure  to which they relate must be computed as a part of the overall total square footage of allowable signage, or the number of  signs  allowed.  Signs  painted on  buildings  must be measured by the smallest polygon enclosing the letters and symbols of the  sign . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.29.060  Exempt signs.

             The  signs  listed in this Section are exempt from the permit requirements and standards of this Chapter but must comply with SCC  14.29.050 (5), Sight  Distance , and 14.29.050(6), Traffic Safety, and may not be illuminated. If an  applicant  desires a  sign  that does not meet the terms of an exemption below, the  applicant  must apply for a permit for a nonexempt  sign  and meet the other requirements of this Chapter.

             (1)    Official Public  Signs .  Signs  that regulate traffic, legal notices and official instruments,  signs  established by government agencies,  signs  indicating bus stops and other similar transportation facilities, etc., are exempt.

             (2)    Community Identification  Signs . Community identification  signs  are exempt, provided they are 60 square feet or less in size. In the Alger Community Planning area, community identification  signs  must be 40 square feet or less in size.

             (3)     Temporary  Political  Signs .  Temporary  political  signs  located on private property are exempt; provided, that such  signs  may not exceed 32 square feet in area nor 48 inches in vertical dimension, and may be located no higher than eight feet above the surrounding ground.

             (4)    Product  Signs .  Signs  incorporated on machinery or equipment at the manufacturer’s or distributor’s level, which identify or advertise only the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment, such as  signs  customarily affixed to vending machines, newspaper racks and gasoline pumps.

             (5)    Real Estate  Signs  Requirements. Real estate  signs  are permitted for the sales of individual  lots  in all  zones ; provided, they must be located on the property to which they apply. Residential real estate  signs  may not exceed six square feet and must be removed upon the closing of the home sale. Commercial real estate  signs  may not be greater than 16 square feet in size.

             (6)    Attention-Getting Devices. The use of pennants, flags, and banners is prohibited for ongoing continuous use in conjunction with commercial or industrial facilities, but is allowed in conjunction with the opening of a new place of business or for special events for 14 continuous  days . Such pennants, flags or banners must be secured to the  building  and may not be strung across the property.

             (7)     Temporary  Signs Advertising a Special or Community Event.  Signs  that display the date, time, location, and sponsor of special events of community interest. Such  signs  must be designed so that they do not hinder the visibility of other signage, are compatible with the surrounding environment and are consistent with community aesthetic sensibilities. Such  signs  may not remain more than 14  days  prior to or seven  days  after the date of the event.

             (8)    Miscellaneous  Temporary  Signs. On-premises nonilluminated  temporary  signs advertising religious, charitable, civic, fraternal, political or similar organizational events not to exceed 45  days  per year. Such  signs  may be 16 square feet in size. The height may not exceed 15 feet.

             (9)    Off-Premises Directional  Signs . Directional  signs  must identify the place (e.g., Alger), arrow, and mileage. Such  signs  may be placed only at critical intersections and may be no larger than six inches by 24 inches.

             (10)    Open House Real Estate  Signs . Open house real estate  signs  must be installed on the day of the open house and must be removed at the end of the day when the open house is over.

             (11)    Institutional or  church  signs provided they are not over 32 square feet in size, not greater than 15 feet in height and limited to only one per  lot . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.29.070  Prohibited signs.

             The following  signs  are prohibited:

             (1)    Billboards except when specifically permitted per Division 1 of this Title or in the Master Planned Resort  zone .

             (2)    Abandoned  signs .

             (3)    Flashing, revolving, animated or moving  signs .

             (4)    Strobe lights, searchlights, and revolving lights.

             (5)    Private directional  signs  except those on site that regulate traffic and parking (exit, entrance, parking in rear) not to exceed four square feet.

             (6)    Rooftop  signs  erected upon the roof of a  building , or a  sign  attached to a  building  which projects vertically above the roof, eave, awning or parapet. This does not include  signs  attached to the vertical face of a parapet, awning or canopy; providing, that it does not project above the parapet, awning or canopy. Painted rooftop  signs  are not allowed. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.29.080  On-premises signs.

             (1)    On-premises  signs  display only advertising copy strictly incidental to the lawful use of the premises on which it is located and may contain, unless otherwise prohibited, any or all of the following information:

             (a)    The name of the owner, occupant, management, or firm occupying the premises;

             (b)    The address of the use;

             (c)    The kind or name of the business and/or the brand name of the principal commodities sold or produced on the premises; and

             (d)    Other information relative to a service or activity involved in the conduct of the business.

             (2)    On-Premises  Sign  Requirements.

             (a)     Signs  Associated With Residential Land Use. Residential uses are allowed to post one nonilluminated  sign  not to exceed four square feet.

             (b)    Tourism-Related  Signs  in the Rural Freeway Services  Zone . One freeway-oriented advertising  sign  per business may be permitted in the Rural Freeway Services  zone ; provided, that the business must establish that it is a tourist-oriented business, i.e., that it satisfies a need of the traveling public and that it relies on the traveling consumer for a significant portion of its business. The height of such  signs  may be up to 60 feet to accommodate viewing from vehicles traveling on the interstate. Rural Freeway Service  signs  must be no larger than 168 square feet in size. New RFS  signs  must be distanced at least 660 feet from other existing RFS  signs  unless  lot  configuration would preclude reasonable development of a  sign  on individual  lots .

             (c)    Tourism-Related  Signs  Associated With Commercial and Industrial Development. Lawfully established commercial and industrial businesses located along four-lane State highways may be permitted one highway-oriented advertising  sign  per business consistent with the standards described under Subsection (2)(b) of this Section pursuant to approval of an administrative special use permit.

             (d)     Seasonal Roadside Stands . Nonilluminated on-premises  signs , excluding banners, are allowed to advertise a  seasonal roadside stand ; provided, that the collective square footage of the  signs  must be no greater than 32 square feet. Regulations regarding off-premises seasonal roadside  signs  are outlined in SCC  14.29.110 (3)(b).

             (e)     Subdivision  Real Estate Sales  Signs . Real estate  signs  advertising the sale of  lots  located within a  subdivision  are permitted; provided, that there may be no more than one  sign  per  subdivision  entrance, and each  sign  must be no greater than 32 square feet in area and no greater than eight feet in height. Real estate  signs  must be removed upon the closing of  subdivision  sales. One  sign  no larger than 12 square feet may also be installed off-premises in order to direct visitors to the property. Regulations regarding off-premises real estate  signs  are outlined in SCC  14.29.110 (3)(a).

             (f)    Tourism-Related  Signs  in the Master Planned Resort  Zone . Master planned resort developments located along four-lane State highways or State Route 20 may be permitted one highway-oriented advertising  sign  per business consistent with the standards described under Subsection (2)(b) of this Section pursuant to approval of an administrative special use permit. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.29.090  Commercial business signs.

             Each operating enterprise, institution or business must be permitted to have two on-site business identification  signs  per  building  entrance and one off-premises  sign  as defined and regulated by SCC  14.29.110  unless otherwise provided herein. In the  Rural Village  Residential and Commercial  zones , each operating enterprise, institution or business must be permitted to have one on-site business identification  sign  per  building  entrance and one off-premises  sign  as defined and regulated by SCC  14.29.110  unless otherwise provided herein. Business  signs  must be incorporated into the landscaping of the site when landscaping is provided and should be designed to reflect the surrounding  rural character  in design and size. In addition to the other requirements of this Section, business  signs  are subject to the following size requirements:

             (1)    Maximum wall  sign  area must not exceed two square feet for each lineal foot of the  building  wall on which the  sign  is attached, not to exceed 40 square feet. In the  Rural Village  Commercial  zone  in Alger, wall  signs  may be up to four square feet for each lineal foot of the  building  wall.

             (2)    Maximum freestanding  sign  area must not exceed one square foot for each five lineal feet of  street  frontage, not to exceed 40 square feet except for tourism-related  signs  subject to the provisions of SCC  14.29.080 (2)(b), (2)(c), and (2)(f). In the  Rural Village  Commercial and  Rural Village  Residential areas of Alger, maximum freestanding  sign  area must not exceed 20 square feet and must be no higher than 12 feet.

             (3)    Under canopy  sign  area and dimensions must be one square foot for each lineal foot of the width of the canopy, awning, marquee or similar  structure  from which the  sign  is suspended, as measured perpendicular to the wall. Minimum vertical clearance between the lower edge of an under canopy  sign  and the ground must be eight feet. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.29.100  Signs advertising industrial businesses.

             The following requirements govern signage for industries:

             (1)    One  building  identification  sign  for each  building  is permitted; provided, that no  sign  may exceed 25 square feet in area.

             (2)    Each enterprise, institution or franchise is permitted wall  signs , one under canopy  sign  per  street  frontage and one freestanding  sign  each, subject to the following minimum size requirements. (Note: Multiple businesses in the same  building  must apportion facade length,  building , wall and  street  frontage such that any maximum is not exceeded for a particular property.)

             (3)    Maximum Size.

             (a)    Maximum wall  sign  area may not exceed three square feet for each lineal foot of the  building  wall on which the  sign  is attached.

             (b)    Maximum projecting  sign  area is one square foot for each two lineal feet of  building  wall on which the  sign  projects, not to exceed 64 square feet. The total area of the projecting  sign  must be subtracted from the permitted total of the facade  signs .

             (c)    Freestanding  signs  must have a maximum of one square foot for each lineal foot of  street  frontage, not to exceed 150 square feet.

             (d)    For under canopy  signs , the maximum  sign  area must be one square foot for each lineal foot of width of canopy, awning, marquee or similar  structure  from which the  sign  is suspended, measured perpendicular to the  building  wall.

             (e)    The minimum vertical clearance between the lower edge of an under canopy  sign  and the ground must be eight feet. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.29.110  Off-premises signs.

             (1)    An off-premises  sign  is a  sign  structure or billboard advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment which is sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at a place other than the property of which the  sign  or billboard is located.

             (2)    General Requirements. Off-premises  signs  must conform to the following requirements:

             (a)    Lighted  signs  must be effectively shielded to prevent light from being directed at any portion of the highway  right-of-way , or be of such intensity or brilliance to cause or to otherwise interfere with or impair a driver’s vision.

             (b)    Maximum height of 15 feet, except as otherwise permitted.

             (c)    Only one off-premises  sign  may be permitted per parcel.

             (3)    Special Off-Premises  Sign  Requirements.

             (a)    Real Estate  Signs . One off-premises  sign  advertising the sale of  lots  located within a  subdivision  may be permitted after final plat approval provided the  sign  is established with the approval of the  property owner . Each off-premises real estate  sign  may be no greater than 32 square feet in area, and may be no greater than eight feet in height. Such  signs  may be erected no longer than a period of one year unless the  subdivision  is larger than 40  lots  and then the maximum time frame for the  temporary  sign is two years. Real estate  signs  must be removed upon closing of the sale of the  lots  in the  subdivision  should this occur earlier than the allowed time frame.

             (b)     Temporary  Advertising for  Seasonal Roadside Stand . Two  temporary  off-site  signs  may be used to advertise  seasonal roadside stands  so long as the  sign  is removed after the  growing season  and is no larger than 16 square feet.

             (c)    Billboard  Sign  Requirements. Billboards are  outdoor advertising  structures advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment which is sold, produced or manufactured and/or furnished at a place other than on the property of which the billboard is located. Billboards must meet the following requirements:

             (i)     Sign  surface area: maximum 300 square feet per face.

             (ii)    Maximum number of signs: one  sign  per  structure , which may be single- or double-faced.

             (iii)    Maximum height: 40 feet.

             (iv)    Minimum setback: 45 feet from the nearest  right-of-way  line; and 100 feet from the  right-of-way  line intersection point measured at any angle.

             (v)    Minimum spacing: 500 feet on the same side of the  road  from another billboard.

             (vi)    Only one  sign  is allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back or “V” formation, but prohibits two  signs  (side-by-side) facing the same location. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))