Chapter 14.62 CONCURRENCY

             Division 6 Public Facilities

         Chapter 14.62
CONCURRENCY

             Sections:

              14.62.010    Purpose.

              14.62.020    Applicability.

              14.62.025    Definitions.

              14.62.030     Repealed.

              14.62.040    Project concurrency review.

              14.62.050    Phased development.

              14.62.060    Concurrency determination—Transportation.

              14.62.070    Concurrency determination—Nontransportation.

              14.62.080    Certificate of capacity.

              14.62.090     Repealed.

              14.62.100    Development within municipal UGAs.

              14.62.110    Annual concurrency assessment.

        14.62.010  Purpose.

             (1)    Skagit County is required by RCW  36.70A.070 (6)(e) and the planning goals of RCW  36.70A.020  to ensure that transportation improvements or transportation systems management strategies to accommodate the impacts of development are in place when a project is first occupied, or that a financial commitment is in place to complete the improvements or transportation systems management strategies within six years.

             (2)    Concurrency for certain urban and rural public facilities and services is ensured by the implementation of the Capital Facilities Plan, the County’s monitoring and annual review of that plan, and the County’s response in the absence of concurrency. Certain public facilities and services also need to be analyzed before the County can issue a  project permit  for a specific development. This Chapter addresses both the annual concurrency review process and the system whereby individual development projects are examined for concurrency and  project permits  are issued only after it is demonstrated that the levels of service will not be degraded below the adopted level of service standards for these facilities and services. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080005 (part): Ord. 17938 Attch. F (part), 2000. Formerly 14.28.010)

        14.62.020  Applicability.

             (1)    This Chapter applies to all development except the following:

             (a)    Exempt  Project Permit .

             (i)     Boundary line adjustment .

             (ii)     Final subdivision  (if a concurrency test was conducted for the corresponding  preliminary subdivision ).

             (iii)     Rezone  (but not including a contract  rezone  which establishes a specific timeline for constructing the specific use and a deadline for such construction after which the contract  rezone  expires).

             (iv)    Shoreline substantial development  variance .

             (v)     Street  vacation.

             (vi)     Temporary  use permit.

             (vii)     Variance .

             (b)    Exempt Types or Levels of Development.

             (i)    Single-family  dwelling unit .

             (ii)    Duplex.

             (iii)     Accessory dwelling unit .

             (iv)    Any addition to, renovation or  replacement  of a  residential structure  with no change in use and no more than one additional  dwelling unit  added, such as reroofing.

             (v)    Any accessory  structure  with no change in use and no more than one additional  dwelling unit  added.

             (vi)    Interior completion of a  structure  for a use with the same or less intensity as the existing use or a previously approved use.

             (vii)     Temporary  construction trailer.

             (viii)     Driveway , resurfacing, or parking  lot  paving.

             (ix)    Demolition.

             (x)    Any other permit or approval that the  Director  determines has no impact on a concurrency facility or service.

             (2)    Exemption from Obtaining Concurrency Determination for Transportation. Any development generating a total of four or less peak-hour trips from the total project shall be exempt from obtaining a concurrency determination for transportation, but shall not be exempt from obtaining a concurrency determination for non-transportation facilities and services and shall also not be exempt from providing appropriate transportation improvements or mitigation for traffic impacts in the immediate vicinity of the project as may be required by SCC Title  14  Division 1, Zoning and Land Uses, SCC Chapter  14.66  or  14.74 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20090010 Attch. 1 (part); Ord. O20080005 (part): Ord. O2005007 § 13; Ord. 17938 Attch. F (part), 2000. Formerly 14.28.020)

        14.62.025  Definitions.

             The definitions in this Section apply throughout this Chapter and control over any conflicting definitions in SCC  14.04.020 .

             “Affected County intersection” means a County intersection through which a development project will add 20 or more peak hour trips.

             “Affected County  road  segment” means a County  road  segment on which the development project will add 20 or more peak hour trips.

             “Available capacity” means capacity in a concurrency facility or service that is available for use without requiring facility construction, expansion or modification or will be available at project occupancy as a result of a committed improvement.

             “Capital facilities” means facilities or improvements included in a capital budget.

             “Capital Facilities Plan” means a Capital Facilities Plan adopted by a board of commissioners responsible for its implementation and submitted to the County for adoption into the County’s  Comprehensive Plan .

             “Certificate of capacity” means a document issued by Planning and Development Services indicating the quantity of traffic impacts on County  roads  and the quantity of capacity for nontransportation concurrency facilities and services that has been reserved for a specific development project on a specific property.

             “Concurrency determination” means a determination that compares a proposed project’s impact on a given facility to the capacity of such facility, taking into account available facility capacity and any mitigation measures proposed by the  applicant .

             “Concurrency facilities and services” means the facilities and services for which project concurrency review is required in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. All of the concurrency facilities and services other than County  roads  are referred to as nontransportation concurrency facilities and services.

             “Concurrency facility and service providers” means the County  department  or other governmental entity responsible for providing the applicable service or facility to a development project subject to project concurrency review, as listed in SCC  14.62.110 .

             “County  road  intersections” means intersections between two County  roads , between County  roads  and lower traffic volume  city  streets, and between County  roads  and lower traffic volume State highways.

             “County  road  segments” means portions of individual County  roads  for which LOS is analyzed using the Birdsall method or Highway Capacity Manual (HCM).

             “Final concurrency decision” means a decision made by the  project permit  decision maker that there is or is not concurrency.

             “Funded projects” means transportation improvement projects for which a financial commitment is in place to complete the improvements or  TSM strategies  within six years of the date the final concurrency decision is to be made. Each year, projects are to be designated as “funded” by the Board of County Commissioners at the time of adoption of the  Six-Year Transportation Improvement Program .

             “Level of service” or “level of service standard” means an established minimum capacity of public facilities or services that must be provided per unit of demand or other appropriate measure of need. For transportation, an A through F scale is frequently used to reflect level of service and to designate an LOS standard.

             “Rural level of service” means a level of service applicable to all portions of the County not within an  urban growth area .

             “Urban level of service” means a level of service applicable within an  urban growth area .

             “Project concurrency review” means a system of reviewing specific development projects to ensure that  project permits  are issued only after it is demonstrated that the levels of service on concurrency facilities and services will not be degraded below the adopted level of service standards for these facilities and services. This system involves an  application  filed by the permit  applicant , a concurrency determination for facilities and service made by the concurrency facility and service provider and a final concurrency decision made by the  project permit  decision maker. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.62.030  Concurrency facilities and services.

              Repealed by Ord. O20160004.  (Ord. O20080005 (part): Ord. 17938 Attch. F (part), 2000. Formerly 14.28.030)

        14.62.040  Project concurrency review.

             (1)    Timing. All  applicants  for  project permits , except those exempt, must apply for project concurrency review at the time the  applicant  submits the  applications  for development  project permits . Inquiries about availability of capacity on concurrency facilities and services may be made prior to  project permit  applications, but responses to such inquires are advisory only and available capacity can only be reserved through a certificate of capacity as set forth in this Chapter.

             (2)    Concurrency Facilities and Services. The following concurrency facilities and services, if used by the proposed development, must be evaluated during project concurrency review:

                         Location

                         County  roads

                         Public water

                         Police

                         Fire

                         Sewer

                          Stormwater

                         Bayview Ridge UGA

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         Big  Lake  Rural Village and Swinomish UGA

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         No

                         No

                         Other rural areas

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         No

                         No

                         Municipal UGAs where an urban reserve  project permit  is not required

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         Yes

                         No

                         No

                         Municipal UGAs where an urban reserve  project permit  is required

                         See  city  requirements and SCC Chapter  14.57

             (3)    Procedures.

             (a)     Applications  for project concurrency review must be submitted on forms provided by Planning and Development Services.

             (b)    Project concurrency review must be performed for the specific property, uses, densities, and intensities based on the information provided by the  applicant . The  applicant  shall specify densities and intensities that are consistent with the uses allowed or to be vested for the property. If the project concurrency review is being requested in conjunction with a contract  rezone , the  applicant  must specify the densities and intensities consistent with the proposed contract zoning for the property.

             (c)    Upon receipt of a complete  application  for a  project permit , there shall be a tentative reservation of traffic impacts on County  roads  and a tentative reservation of capacity for non-transportation concurrency facilities and services that will serve that development in order to account for the potential future traffic impacts and future use of capacity by that development. That tentative reservation shall convert to a final reservation of traffic impacts/capacity upon issuance of a certificate of capacity or shall become void in the event that  project permits  for the development are not issued.

             (d)    Planning and Development Services shall notify the concurrency facility and services providers of all  applications  received requiring project concurrency review and request a concurrency determination.

             (e)    The concurrency facility and service providers shall notify the  applicant  and Planning and Development Services of the results of the concurrency determination within 30  days . If additional information is needed to determine concurrency, such additional information may be requested by the concurrency facility and service provider, but such request shall not make the original  application  to be deemed incomplete.

             (f)    The decision maker for the project permit(s) shall make a final concurrency decision as part of the  project permit  decision(s) based on the concurrency determination and all relevant evidence presented in the public record on the  project permit . The  project permit  may be conditioned as necessary to ensure that an improvement relied upon to demonstrate concurrency will be completed or a transportation systems management strategy will be implemented in the required time frame. The final concurrency decision shall be a part of the permit decision which is appealable pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.06 .

             (g)    If the decision maker concludes that there is no concurrency and the  project permit  cannot be conditioned to accomplish concurrency, the  project permits  shall be denied.

             (h)    If the decision maker concludes that there is concurrency and issues  project permits , Planning and Development Services shall issue a certificate of capacity to the  applicant  with a copy sent to each concurrency facility and service provider. The certificate of capacity shall be used to maintain an accounting of traffic impacts on County  roads  and capacity for non-transportation concurrency facilities and services that have been reserved.

             (i)    If the  project permit  for a project is withdrawn, expires or is otherwise cancelled, the certificate of capacity for that development shall automatically be voided. Planning and Development Services shall send notice of all voided certificates of capacity to each concurrency facility and service provider.

             (4)    Administrative Rules. The  Director  may, by administrative order, establish administrative rules to manage project concurrency review.

             (5)    Relation to Other Requirements. Compliance with or exemption from the requirements of this Chapter does not exempt a development project from compliance with any other requirement of the Unified Development Code including, but not limited to, compliance with SCC Chapters  14.32  (Stormwater Management),  14.66  (Public Works Standards),  14.68  (Impact Fees), and  16.12  (State Environmental Policy Act). (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080005 (part): Ord. O20070009 (part); Ord. 17938 Attch. F (part), 2000. Formerly 14.28.040)

        14.62.050  Phased development.

             (1)    When a development is proposed in phases or construction is expected to extend over some period of time, the  applicant  may offer a schedule of occupancy that limits the occupancy during any given period of time. When there is such an offer, the schedule of occupancy may be used in identifying the improvements or transportation systems management strategies that will be required to be implemented with each phase or time period of the development to comply with project concurrency review.

             (2)    All permits based upon a schedule of occupancy must be conditioned so that the improvements or transportation systems management strategies identified as being necessary to comply with project concurrency review are completed prior to each identified development phase (e.g., final plat approval, phased  building permit ). When an  applicant  is relying on funded projects to demonstrate transportation concurrency, the funded projects necessary for concurrency with the level of service standards must be identified at the time of the final concurrency decision. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080005 (part): Ord. 17938 Attch. F (part), 2000. Formerly 14.28.050)

        14.62.060  Concurrency determination—Transportation.

             (1)    A project must demonstrate concurrency with the County  road  segment and  road  intersection level of service standards as follows:

             (a)    The project’s impact on County  roads  must be compared to the capacity of the County  roads , taking into account available and  planned capacity  and any mitigation measures proposed by the  applicant .

             (b)    Two separate methodologies are used:

             (i)    For evaluating  road  system concurrency, the Birdsall method, which uses “ planned capacity ” rather than “physical capacity” in determining roadway improvement needs. Roadways have an unmet need where the ratio of peak hour traffic (V) to  planned capacity  (PC) is greater than one (V/PC &gt; 1.0).

             (ii)    For evaluating individual  road  concurrency, the Highway Capacity Manual, a document which presents a collection of techniques for determining lane capacity and the best methodologies available at the time of publication for determining congestion based on quality of service or level of service for  streets ,  roads , and highways. The Highway Capacity Manual type methods selected by the County Engineer shall be used to assess individual  road  segments and intersections capacity.

             (2)    The annual concurrency report for County  roads  (see SCC  14.62.110 ) will provide the basic starting information for this assessment.

             (3)    Traffic information used for the annual report shall be updated as necessary to account for traffic levels from the following development projects if these projects were not considered in the last annual report:

             (a)    Traffic from newly constructed development projects;

             (b)    Projects for which traffic impacts have been tentatively reserved; and

             (c)    Projects for which a final concurrency decision has been made.

             (4)    The traffic information used for the annual report shall also be updated and reserved traffic impacts removed as necessary as a result of any discontinued certificates of concurrency and any funded projects after the last annual report.

             (5)    Each affected County  road  segment and affected County intersection shall be reviewed and if necessary analyzed. The  applicant  may be required to provide a traffic analysis if existing information does not provide adequate information for this assessment.

             (6)    There is concurrency with the individual  road  segment and intersection level of service standards if, taking into account funded projects:

             (a)    The level of service on each affected County  road  segment and each affected County intersection will meet or exceed the standards adopted in the  Comprehensive Plan  and, if applicable, the Bayview Ridge Subarea Plan; or

             (b)    The  applicant  agrees to modify the project or provide transportation improvements or transportation systems management strategies and/or other binding financial commitments that will result in the level of service on each affected County  road  segment and each affected County intersection meeting or exceeding the standards adopted in the  Comprehensive Plan  and, if applicable, the Bayview Ridge Subarea Plan. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080005 (part): Ord. O20030033 (part); Ord. 17938 Attch. F (part), 2000. Formerly 14.28.060)

        14.62.070  Concurrency determination—Non-transportation.

             (1)    Development projects required to obtain a concurrency determination for non-transportation concurrency facilities and services shall demonstrate that there is concurrency with each non-transportation concurrency facilities and services as described in the LOS table in the  Comprehensive Plan  Capital Facilities Element and as follows:

             (a)    Water. If the project is within the service area for a public water system as identified in the Coordinated Water Services Plan (CWSP), the  applicant  must provide a letter of water availability from the applicable water system purveyor and the project must be conditioned as appropriate to provide water system improvements necessary to meet the applicable urban or rural LOS standards. If the project is within the Bayview Ridge UGA, the  property owner  must connect to the PUD No. 1 water system.

             (b)    Sewer. If the project is within an area approved for public sanitary sewer and the applicable sewer purveyor’s  Comprehensive Plan , the  applicant  must provide a letter of sewer availability from the applicable purveyor demonstrating the project complies with all requirements of that purveyor for obtaining sewer service, including any conditions as appropriate for improvements necessary to meet the applicable standards adopted by that purveyor. If the project is within the Bayview Ridge UGA, the owner must submit confirmation of sewer availability from the  city  of Burlington prior to  development approval  and must connect to the existing sewer line or extend the line to serve the project.

             (c)     Stormwater . The  property owner  must construct surface and  stormwater  management improvements consistent with SCC Chapter  14.32 ,  Stormwater  Management. Surface and  stormwater  management improvements must be constructed consistent with the adopted Bay View  Watershed  Stormwater Management Plan Phase 1.

             (2)    Non-transportation concurrency facility and service providers shall be responsible for maintaining and monitoring the available capacity for their facility for the purpose of responding to requests for project concurrency determinations and for responding to requests by the County during the annual concurrency determination. The providers shall take into account existing use of their facility, additional use from anticipated growth, new projects for which capacity has been tentatively reserved and new projects for which a final concurrency decision has been made, and additional capacity available as a result of any discontinued certificate of capacity and capacity improvements that are funded and under construction.

             (3)    To demonstrate concurrency with each of the non-transportation concurrency facilities and services, the  applicant  may:

             (a)    Demonstrate that the development will have a lower need for capacity than usual; or

             (b)    Modify the  application  to reduce the need for capacity; or

             (c)    Offer binding mitigation measures that will provide additional capacity necessary to maintain the level of service standard upon project occupancy, i.e., the time when a development project is ready to be occupied and will use concurrency facilities and services. It shall be assumed that the entire proposed development will be occupied upon issuance of the initial occupancy permit for the project. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080009 (part); Ord. O20080005 (part): Ord. 20040008 Attch. 3 § 4; Ord. 17938 Attch. F (part), 2000. Formerly 14.28.070)

        14.62.080  Certificate of capacity.

             (1)    A certificate of capacity:

             (a)    May only be issued upon payment of any fee due to the service provided and performance of any precondition established in the permit decision as a prerequisite for obtaining such certificate.

             (b)    Applies only to the specific land uses, densities, intensities and development projects described in the  application  and  project permit .

             (c)    Is not transferable to other property, but may be transferred to new owners of the same property.

             (d)    Is valid so long as the accompanying  project permit  has not expired or been revoked.

             (e)    Is valid for any modification of the permits for which the certificate was issued so long as such modification does not require the  applicant  to obtain a new  project permit .

             (2)    Any capacity that is not used because the full extent of the development is not built must be returned to the pool of available capacity.

             (3)    Tracking Exempt Development. Concurrency facility and service providers must establish a tracking system to account for exempt development in the same manner as certificates of capacity are used to maintain an accounting of traffic impacts on County  roads  and capacity for non-transportation concurrency facilities and services that have been reserved. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080005 (part): Ord. 17938 Attch. F (part), 2000. Formerly 14.28.080)

        14.62.090  Facility capacity fees.

              Repealed by Ord. O20160004.  (Ord. O20080005 (part): Ord. 17938 Attch. F (part), 2000. Formerly 14.28.090)

        14.62.100  Development within municipal UGAs.

             (1)    It is the responsibility of a  city  or town to perform project concurrency review for development within the unincorporated portion of a  city ’s or town’s  urban growth area . The County, in its annual concurrency review, must assess concurrency within the unincorporated portions of all  urban growth areas .

             (2)    Consistent with SCC  14.06.300 , Foundations of review, the County must review and condition  project permit  applications to ensure that project impacts occurring outside of municipal UGAs are mitigated consistent with County  road  standards and transportation concurrency requirements of SCC  14.62.060 . Skagit County must make a final concurrency determination as part of the permit decision pursuant to SCC  14.62.040 (2)(f) through (i) and issue a certificate of capacity pursuant to SCC  14.62.080  if the requirements of this Chapter are met. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080005 (part): Ord. R20020180: Ord. 17938 Attch. F (part), 2000. Formerly 14.28.100)

        14.62.110  Annual concurrency assessment.

             (1)    Annual Concurrency Assessment for  Roads . The County Engineer must produce a concurrency report for County  roads  by July 1 of each year to update the status of County  roads  with respect to concurrency.

             (a)    The County Engineer must evaluate the high traffic County  road  segments (any County  road  segment on which there are at least 8,000 average daily trips) and high traffic County  road  intersections (any County  road  intersection into which the total approach volume is at least 7,000 average daily trips and the approach volume from all of the minor legs totals at least 1,000 average daily trips) using a Highway Capacity Manual type method (as selected by the County Engineer) to determine whether these  road  segments and intersections comply with the level of service standards adopted in the  Comprehensive Plan .

             (b)    This evaluation must be based on existing traffic levels plus traffic impacts from development plus traffic impacts from development projects anticipated for completion within the next year based upon a growth projection, upon consideration of projects for which traffic impacts have been tentatively reserved and upon projects for which a final concurrency decision has been made.

             (c)    In addition, a projection of those County  road  segments service standards adopted in the  Comprehensive Plan  over the next five years shall be made to help in the planning for  road  system improvement projects.

             (d)    Any County  road  segment or County  road  intersection, which has fallen below the level of service standards adopted in the  Comprehensive Plan , shall be considered concurrent if an improvement project will cause that  road  segment or intersection to meet or exceed the adopted level of service standards and has been designated on the  Six-Year TIP  as a funded project. The results of the annual update for individual  road  concurrency shall be included in the annual report.

             (2)    Annual Concurrency Assessment for Non-Transportation Concurrency Facilities and Services.

             (a)    By July 1 of each year, the following concurrency facility and service providers must report to the County the total available capacity of their facility or service in units that are directly comparable to the level of service standards established for these facilities and services.

                          Facility/Service

                          Provider

                          Unincorporated  Urban Growth Area

                          Rural

                         Water

                         Water purveyors identified in Coordinated Water System Plan

                         Sanitary Sewer

                         Municipal sewer service providers

                         Skagit County Sewer District—1 for portions of Swinomish UGA

                          City  of Burlington—Bayview Ridge UGA

                         Big  Lake  Sewer District for Big  Lake  Rural Village only

                         Whatcom County Water District No. 12 pursuant to existing sewer service contracts only

                          Stormwater

                         County Public Works

                         Police

                         County Sheriff

                         Fire

                         Fire Districts

                         Fairgrounds

                         County  Parks  Department

                         General Government

                         County Administrator

                          Parks

                         County  Parks  Department

                         Public Safety (Jails)

                         County Sheriff

                         Senior Centers

                         County Senior Services

                          Solid Waste

                         County Public Works

             (b)    The annual information submitted by each provider shall take into account current capacity usage, capacity tentatively reserved for pending permit  applications , capacity reserved for permitted projects that are not yet fully occupied based upon final concurrency decisions, capacity available as a result of expired, withdrawn or revoked final concurrency decisions and capacity that has been added by the implementation of improvements and strategies.

             (c)    By October 1 of each year, the  Director  must evaluate capacity of the facilities and services set forth above to determine if the level of service standards for each of these facilities and services is being met. The level of service standards to be used in this annual review are set in the  Comprehensive Plan  Capital Facilities Element.

             (3)    Results of Concurrency Assessment.

             (a)    The  Director  must present the annual concurrency assessment to the Board of County Commissioners at or before the start of the annual budget process along with recommendations on action to take in response to the assessment.

             (b)    The results of the annual concurrency assessment must be used to update the Capital Facilities Plan and establish the County’s annual budget.

             (c)    In the event that the annual concurrency assessment determines that concurrency is not being met for any concurrency facilities and services, the County must evaluate the need for modifications to adopted levels of service standards, reassess the land use element of the  Comprehensive Plan , or impose additional requirements or limitations on development until concurrency is obtained. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20160004 § 6 (Att. 6); Ord. O20080005 (part): Ord. O20060007 § 12 (part): Ord. O20030033 (part). Formerly 14.28.110)