Chapter 14.79 BINDING SITE PLANS

         Chapter 14.79
BINDING SITE PLANS

             Sections:

              14.79.010    Purpose.

              14.79.020    Applicability.

              14.79.030    General provisions.

              14.79.040    Application requirements.

              14.79.050    Review criteria.

              14.79.060    Recording and binding effect.

              14.79.070    Site improvements required prior to approval of building permit.

        14.79.010  Purpose.

             The purposes of this Chapter are to:

             (1)    Provide an alternative administrative method for division of land for commercial and industrial zoned property, or condominiums;

             (2)    Allow the  Director  to modify interior lot-based or  lot  line requirements contained within the zoning,  building , fire and other similar uniform codes adopted by the County;

             (3)    Allow the  Director  to authorize sharing of  open space , parking, access and other improvements among contiguous properties subject to the  binding site plan ; and

             (4)    Specify administrative requirements for  binding site plans  in addition to the procedural requirements of SCC Chapter  14.06  and in accordance with applicable Washington State and Skagit County laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.79.020  Applicability.

             This Chapter applies to an  application  for a  binding site plan . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.79.030  General provisions.

             (1)    Any  person  seeking the use of a  binding site plan  to divide his or her property for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership of commercially or industrially zoned property, or creation of condominium units, is required to apply for, complete, and obtain approval for a  binding site plan , as provided in RCW Chapter  58.17  and this Chapter.

             (2)    The site that is subject to the  binding site plan  may be reviewed independently, based on as-built plans, for fully developed sites.

             (3)    The site that is subject to the  binding site plan  must consist of one or more contiguous  legal lots . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.79.040  Application requirements.

             (1)    In addition to the general  application  requirements of SCC  14.06.230  and the  application  requirements for preliminary approval of a  long subdivision  in SCC  14.74.100 , an  application  for a  binding site plan  must contain:

             (a)    A  site plan  that meets the requirements for a  preliminary subdivision  map in SCC  14.74.100 , including:

             (i)    All proposed or existing uses and  structures ;

             (ii)    Layout of sewers;

             (iii)    Location and size of utility trunk lines serving the site;

             (iv)    The number and location of proposed or existing parking spaces on and off the site;

             (v)    Proposed and existing  structures  including  building  envelopes and  building  setback lines;

             (vi)    The location of proposed or existing  open space  including any required landscaped areas;

             (vii)    The layout of an internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation system, including proposed ingress and egress for vehicles and roadway widths, and additional  right-of-way  if required on substandard  roads ;

             (viii)    Proposed  road  names;

             (ix)    The location and size of water bodies and  drainage  features, both natural and manmade;

             (x)    Existing and proposed easements and existing access.

             (b)    All existing or proposed covenants, easements, maintenance agreements or other documents applicable to use or maintenance of the site.

             (c)    A phasing plan, acreage of phases, and time schedule, if the site is intended to be developed in phases. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.79.050  Review criteria.

             (1)    An  application  for a  binding site plan  is subject to the type of review specified in SCC  14.06.150 .

             (2)    The  application  may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied, based on the following requirements:

             (a)    The  binding site plan  must ensure that the collective proposal functions as one site with respect to, but not limited to,  lot  access, interior circulation,  open space , landscaping,  drainage facilities , facility maintenance and parking.

             (b)    The  binding site plan  must meet the requirements outlined in Division 1 of this Title, and SCC  14.74.050 , for new development.

             (c)    If a previously approved  site plan  is submitted for  binding site plan  approval, the conditions and limitations imposed by the  Director  may, where appropriate, include any conditions and limitations contained in the previously approved  site plan . Subsequent  project permits  for the land will still be subject to compliance with the zoning,  building , and other applicable land use codes and regulations existing at the time of submittal of the  binding site plan  review and expressly depicted on the  binding site plan .

             (d)    When a  binding site plan  is being considered concurrently with another land development  application , the  Director  will incorporate all conditions and limitations imposed on the concurrent  application  into the  binding site plan . Subsequent site  project permits  for the land will still be subject to compliance with the zoning,  building , and other applicable land use codes and regulations existing at the time of vesting of the  application , unless addressed as part of the  binding site plan  review and expressly depicted on the  binding site plan .

             (e)    The  binding site plan  must contain applicable inscriptions or attachments setting forth limitations and conditions to which the plan is subject, including any applicable irrevocable  dedications  of property and containing a provision requiring that any development of the site must be in conformity with the approved  site plan .

             (f)    The  Director  may authorize sharing of  open space , parking, access and other improvements among contiguous properties subject to the  binding site plan .

             (g)    Conditions of use, maintenance and restrictions on redevelopment of shared  open space , parking, access and other improvements must be identified on the  binding site plan  and enforced by covenants, easements or other similar mechanisms. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.79.060  Recording and binding effect.

             (1)    After approval of a  binding site plan  for land, all or a portion of which will be subjected to the provisions of RCW Chapter  64.32  or  64.34 , the  applicant  must record the approved  binding site plan  with a record of survey (except for the provisions of RCW  58.09.090 (1)(d)(iv)) as a single recording document complying with the requirements of this Chapter labeled as “ Binding Site Plan .” Before recording, the  applicant  must complete the required improvements. In lieu of completion, all improvements except drainage-related facilities may be bonded.

             (2)    When a record of survey is not required pursuant to RCW  58.09.090 (1)(d)(iv), the applicable record of survey data, consistent with the submittal requirements as adopted by the  Director , must be shown on the  binding site plan  to be recorded.

             (3)    Prior to recording, the approved  binding site plan  must be surveyed and the final recording forms must be prepared by a  professional land surveyor , licensed in the State of Washington. Surveys must include those items prescribed by RCW  58.09.060 .

             (4)    The approved  binding site plan  record of survey recording forms must include the following, in the format prescribed by the Director:

             (a)     Lots  designated by number on the  binding site plan  within the area of the  lot . Tracts must be similarly designated and each tract must be clearly identified with the ownership and purpose;

             (b)    Signature and stamp of the land surveyor who prepared the  binding site plan ;

             (c)    Reference to the recording number of the completed survey as required by this Section if the boundaries have been previously surveyed;

             (d)    Reference to all agreements or covenants required as a condition of approval;

             (e)    Notarized signatures of all  persons  having an ownership or security interest in the land being divided;

             (f)    Approval of the Skagit County Engineer;

             (g)    Approval of the Skagit County Treasurer;

             (h)    Approval of the  Director ; and

             (i)    Approval of the Health Official.

             (5)    The  Director  must examine and  sign  the approved  binding site plan  and record of survey if it conforms to the commercial site  project permit  or the approved  site plan  and all conditions of approval.  Binding site plans  with the record of survey must be recorded with the Skagit County Auditor’s Office. A copy of the documents stamped with the recording number must be sent to the Skagit County Assessor, the Skagit County Treasurer, Skagit County Public Works, and to the  applicant .

             (6)     Lots , parcels, or tracts created through the  binding site plan  procedure will be  legal lots  of record. All provisions, conditions, and requirements of the  binding site plan  are legally enforceable on the purchaser or any other  person  acquiring a lease or other ownership interest of any  lot , parcel, or tract created pursuant to the  binding site plan .

             (7)    Any sale, transfer, or lease of any  lot , tract, or parcel created pursuant to the  binding site plan , that does not conform to the requirements of the  binding site plan  or without  binding site plan  approval, will be considered a violation of RCW Chapter  58.17  and may be restrained by injunctive action and be illegal as provided in RCW Chapter  58.17 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.79.070  Site improvements required prior to approval of building permit.

             (1)    All public and private site improvements required by the approved  binding site plan  must be completed and accepted by the County or subjected to a performance security approved by the  Director  prior to issuing the first  building permit  for the site.

             (2)    Alternatively, the  Director  may condition the completion of such improvements pursuant to an approved phasing. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))