Chapter 14.38 NATURAL RESOURCE LANDS

         Chapter 14.38
NATURAL RESOURCE LANDS

             Sections:

              14.38.010    Applicability.

              14.38.020    Policy.

              14.38.030    Purpose.

              14.38.040    No nuisance.

              14.38.050    Title notice.

              14.38.060    Setbacks.

              14.38.070    Seller disclosure.

        14.38.010  Applicability.

             This Section applies to land, uses, and activities within the following natural resource land zones:

             (1)    Agricultural—Natural Resource Land (Ag-NRL);

             (2)    Secondary Forest—Natural Resource Land (SF-NRL);

             (3)    Industrial Forest—Natural Resource Land (IF-NRL);

             (4)     Mineral  Resource Overlay (MRO);

             (5)    Rural Resource—Natural Resource Land (RRc-NRL). (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.38.020  Policy.

             (1)    It is the declared policy of this County to enhance and encourage natural resource land management within the County. It is the further intent of this County to provide to the residents of this County proper notification of the County’s recognition and support through this Chapter of the right of those  persons  and entities to manage  natural resource lands .

             (2)    State planning goals encourage the conservation of productive  natural resource lands  and discourage incompatible uses. This goal can be fulfilled by assuring that the use of lands adjacent to  natural resource lands  do not interfere with the continued use, in the accustomed manner, for the production of food and agricultural products,  timber , and extraction of  minerals . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.38.030  Purpose.

             (1)    Where non-natural resource lands uses extend into natural resource areas or exist side-by-side, natural resource management operations are frequently the subjects of  nuisance  complaints and on occasion have been forced to cease or curtail operations. Such  nuisance  complaints discourage investments in  natural resource lands  improvements to the detriment of adjacent  natural resource lands  uses and the economic viability of the County’s  natural resource lands  industry as a whole. It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to reduce the loss to the County of its  natural resource lands  by limiting and defining the circumstances under which  natural resource lands  management operations may be considered a  nuisance . This Chapter is not to be construed as in any way modifying or abridging County, State or Federal laws; rather it is only to be utilized in the interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this Code and County regulations.

             (2)    An additional purpose of this Chapter is to promote a good neighbor policy between  natural resource lands  and non-natural resource land  property owners  by advising purchasers and users of property adjacent to or near natural resource land management operations of the inherent potential problems associated with such purchase or residence, including, but not limited to, the use of chemicals; or from spraying, pruning, harvesting, or  mineral  extraction with associated activities, which occasionally generates traffic, dust, smoke, noise, odor and the hours of operation that may accompany natural resource land management operations. It is intended that through mandatory disclosures purchasers and users will better understand the impact of living near  natural resource lands  and be prepared to accept attendant conditions as the natural result of living in or near  natural resource lands  and rural areas.

             (3)    An additional purpose of this Chapter is to provide notice, through a disclosure statement, of the potential incompatibilities, inconveniences and discomforts that may arise from natural resource land management activities. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.38.040  No nuisance.

             No land-based natural resource land management activity, operation, facility, or appurtenances thereof, when conducted or maintained in any of the natural resource  zones  identified in SCC  14.38.010  for commercial purposes, and in a manner consistent with current  best management practices , not superseding local, State, or Federal regulations, is or may be considered a  nuisance  as defined in SCC Chapter  14.04 , regardless of past or future changes in the surrounding area’s land use or  zone . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.38.050  Title notice.

             (1)    Applicability. This Section applies to any  application  for a  project permit  involving a project on or within 500 feet of property within a  zone  identified in SCC  14.38.010 .

             (2)    The  applicant  for the  project permit  must record the title notice described in this Section against the property that is the subject of the  application .

             (3)    The title notice must be prepared on forms provided by the  Department , be signed by the  property owner , and include the following language:

             This parcel lies within an area or is within 500 feet of an area designated as a natural resource land (agricultural, forest, and  mineral resource lands  of  long-term commercial significance ) in Skagit County. A variety of natural resource land commercial activities occur or may occur in the area that may not be compatible with non-resource uses and may be inconvenient or cause discomfort to area residents. This may arise from the use of chemicals; or from spraying, pruning, harvesting, or  mineral  extraction with associated activities, which occasionally generates traffic, dust, smoke, noise, and odor. Skagit County has established natural resource management operations as a priority use on designated  natural resource lands , and area residents should be prepared to accept such incompatibilities, inconveniences, or discomfort from normal, necessary natural resource land operations when performed in compliance with  best management practices  and local, state, and federal law. In the case of  mineral  lands,  application  might be made for mining-related activities including extraction, washing, crushing, stockpiling, blasting, transporting, and recycling of  minerals . In addition, greater  setbacks  than typical may be required from the resource area, consistent with SCC  14.28.060 . Contact Skagit County Planning and Development Services for details.

             (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.38.060  Setbacks.

             (1)    Applicability. This Section applies to a  lot  that is outside of and abutting any of the  zones  identified in SCC  14.38.010 .

             (2)    A  lot  to which this Section applies:

             (a)    Must observe a minimum  building  setback of 200 feet from the adjoining natural resource land  zone ; or

             (b)    The  property owner  must acknowledge in writing the possible occurrence of agricultural,  forestry , or  mining  activity on the adjacent property and waive, in writing, for all current and future owners, any claim for damages that may occur to the  building  or occupants because of such activities which are conducted in accordance with applicable State regulations, and records the acknowledgment and waiver with the County Auditor.

             (3)    In the case of Agricultural-NRL and Industrial Forest-NRL lands, the acknowledgment in Subsection (2)(b) of this Section must also be approved by the owner of the adjacent NRL lands.

             (a)    For Ag-NRL lands, if approval of the adjacent landowner cannot be obtained, the  Department  may reduce the  setback  if it meets the  variance  criteria in SCC Chapter  14.58 .

             (b)    For Industrial Forest-NRL lands, if approval of the adjacent landowner cannot be obtained, a Hearing Examiner  variance  is required to reduce the  setback . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.38.070  Seller disclosure.

             (1)    Applicability. This Section applies to any transfer of real property by sale, exchange, gift, real estate contract, lease with an option to purchase, any other option to purchase, ground lease coupled with improvements, or any other means when the real property is located:

             (a)    Within one mile of land zoned  Agriculture  Natural Resource Land (Ag-NRL), or

             (b)    Within one-quarter mile of land zoned Industrial Forest—Natural Resource Land (IF-NRL), Secondary Forest—Natural Resource Land (SF-NRL), or Rural Resource—Natural Resource Land (RRc-NRL), or  Mineral  Resource Overlay (MRO).

             (2)    Upon a transfer identified in this Section, the buyer must record with the County Auditor a statement containing the following language in conjunction with the deed conveying the real property:

             This property may be designated or may be within 1 mile of designated agricultural land or designated or within 1/4 mile of rural resource, forest, or  mineral resource lands  of  long-term commercial significance  in Skagit County. A variety of natural resource land commercial activities occur or may occur in the area that may not be compatible with non-resource uses and may be inconvenient or cause discomfort to area residents. This may arise from the use of chemicals; or from spraying, pruning, harvesting or  mineral  extraction with associated activities, which occasionally generates traffic, dust, smoke, noise, and odor. Skagit County has established natural resource management operations as a priority use on designated  natural resource lands , and area residents should be prepared to accept such incompatibilities, inconveniences or discomfort from normal, necessary natural resource land operations when performed in compliance with  Best Management Practices  and local, state, and federal law.

             In the case of  mineral  lands,  application  might be made for mining-related activities including extraction, washing, crushing, stockpiling, blasting, transporting and recycling of  minerals . If you are adjacent to designated  natural resource lands , you will have  setback  requirements from designated  natural resource lands .

             (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))