Chapter 14.07 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES

         Chapter 14.07
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES

             Sections:

              14.07.010    Intent.

              14.07.020    General rule.

              14.07.030    Enlargement, alteration, expansion, or change of nonconforming uses.

              14.07.040    Enlargement, alteration, reconstruction of nonconforming buildings and structures.

              14.07.050    Abandonment.

              14.07.060    Procedure for verifying abandonment.

        14.07.010  Intent.

             (1)    It is the intent of this Chapter:

             (a)    To permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival, except as expressly provided in this Chapter; and

             (b)    That nonconformities may not be used as grounds for adding other  structures  or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same  zone ; and

             (c)    That  nonconforming  uses or  structures  not be allowed to expand, be altered or reconstructed except as otherwise outlined in this Chapter. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.07.020  General rule.

             (1)    A  nonconforming  use or  structure  is any  lot ,  building ,  structure , or use of land, that was legally permitted at the time it was established, but is no longer permitted by current regulations.

             (2)    A  nonconforming  use or  structure  is allowed to continue consistent with the limitations in this Chapter.

             (a)    A change in occupancy or ownership does not affect such right to continue such use,  building , or  structure .

             (b)    Nonconformities may not be used as grounds for adding other  structures  or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same  zone .

             (c)     Nonconforming  uses or  structures  may not expand, be altered, or reconstructed except as otherwise authorized in this Chapter. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.07.030  Enlargement, alteration, expansion, or change of nonconforming uses.

             (1)    A  nonconforming  use may not be enlarged, altered, or expanded, except that a  nonconforming  use may be extended throughout any part of the  building  designed for its use prior to becoming a  nonconforming  use. Such an extension must not include any  structural alterations , except those required by law, and no expansion of the  structure  or parking requirements may occur.

             (2)    A  nonconforming  use may not be changed to any other  nonconforming  use, regardless of the conforming or  nonconforming  status of the  building  in which it is housed. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.07.040  Enlargement, alteration, reconstruction of nonconforming buildings and structures.

             (1)    Routine maintenance and  repairs  may be performed on a  nonconforming  structure or  building .

             (2)    When a  nonconforming  building or  structure  is damaged by fire, natural disaster, or other calamity, said  building  or  structure  may be restored or replaced only if:

             (a)    A complete  application  for reconstruction or  replacement  is submitted within one year of the damage; and

             (b)    That the  restoration  or  replacement  is made to conform to the regulations of the  zone  in which the  building  or  structure  is located, or if such regulations cannot physically be met without reducing the size of the  building , the  restoration  does not extend any nonconformity that existed prior to the damage.

             (3)    Additions to  nonconforming  structures that meet all applicable zoning  dimensional standards  are not considered an enlargement under this Section. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.07.050  Abandonment.

             (1)    A  nonconforming  use cannot be reestablished after abandonment. If abandoned, the use of the  building ,  structure , or site must conform with the regulations for the  zone  in which it is located.

             (2)    For the purposes of this Chapter, “abandonment” means:

             (a)    An intention to abandon; and

             (b)    An overt act, which carries the implication that the owner does not claim or retain any interest in the right to the  nonconforming  use.

             (3)    An overt act disclaiming an interest in the  nonconforming  use is presumed if the  nonconforming  use of land or  building  or  structure  ceases for any reason whatsoever for a period of one year.

             (4)    The mere presence of a  structure , equipment, or material does not constitute a continuance of a  nonconforming  use unless the  structure , equipment, or material is actually being occupied or employed in maintaining such use. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.07.060  Procedure for verifying abandonment.

             (1)    When the  Director  obtains information indicating that a  nonconforming  use,  building , or  structure  has or may have been abandoned, the  Director  may send a letter by certified mail return receipt requested to the  property owner  requesting:

             (a)    Confirmation of either abandonment or non-abandonment; and

             (b)    If the  property owner  responds that the  building ,  structure , or use has not been abandoned, the  property owner  must provide documentation that the  nonconforming  use,  structure , or  building  has been occupied, used, or maintained within the last year.

             (2)    If the  property owner  fails to respond to the request within 60  days , the  building ,  structure , or use is deemed abandoned and there is no right to an  appeal .

             (3)    If the  property owner  responds that the  building ,  structure , or use is not abandoned, the  Director  must evaluate the documentation provided and any other information available to the  Director  and make a determination as to whether abandonment has occurred. The  property owner  may  appeal  the  Director ’s decision as a Type 1 review per SCC  14.06.150 .

             (4)    Verification of abandonment under this Section is not required for a use,  structure , or  building  to be abandoned. Abandonment occurs as a matter of law when the conditions set forth in SCC  14.07.050  are met. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))