Chapter 14.32 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT*

         Chapter 14.32
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT*

             Sections:

              14.32.010    Policy.

              14.32.020    Applicability.

              14.32.030    Application requirements.

              14.32.040    Stormwater management manual.

              14.32.050    Projects within the NPDES permit area—Nonresidential projects outside of the NPDES permit area.

              14.32.060    Residential projects outside the NPDES permit area.

              14.32.070    Experimental best management practices (BMPs).

              14.32.080    Land uses and pollutant generating sources.

              14.32.090    Adjustments and exceptions.

              14.32.100    Critical drainage areas.

              14.32.110    Basin planning.

              14.32.120    General stormwater management standards.

              14.32.130    Erosion and sediment control.

              14.32.140    Low-impact development (LID) techniques and facilities.

              14.32.150    Stormwater conveyance.

              14.32.160    Final inspections and approval.

              14.32.170    Operation and maintenance.

              14.32.180    Severability.

             *    Prior legislation: Ords. 17938 (Attch. F), O20020001, O20070003, O20070009 and O20100002 (Exh. 1), O20150006 (Att. A), 20160004 (Att. 6).

        14.32.010  Policy.

             (1)    Purpose. This Chapter seeks to help protect adjacent landowners and others from downstream flooding, erosion, and  pollution  in compliance with the  County’s NPDES permit . The requirements of this Chapter govern both  temporary  and long-term  stormwater  management. This Chapter describes the County’s authority, regulatory requirements, submittal requirements, and procedures for  stormwater  drainage design, review, approval, construction, maintenance, and management in unincorporated Skagit County.

             This chapter is intended to be consistent with the County’s NDPES permit, and in the event of any conflicts between this chapter and the permit, the provisions of the permit control.

             (2)    This Chapter is in furtherance of the following  stormwater  management goals:

             (a)    Management of  stormwater  through a land development strategy emphasizing conservation and use of on-site natural features integrated with hydrologic controls to mimic predevelopment hydrologic conditions;

             (b)    Encouraging creative and coordinated site planning, the conservation of natural conditions and features, the use of appropriate technologies and techniques, and the efficient layout of  streets , utility networks and other public improvements;

             (c)    Reducing  hard surfaces  and  impervious surfaces ;

             (d)    Preserving or restoring  native vegetation ;

             (e)    Protecting or preserving water quality; and

             (f)    Promoting the use of low impact development (LID) techniques by making  LID  measures the preferred and commonly used approach to site development. (Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.020  Applicability.

             (1)    No site development activity requiring review under this Chapter, including land disturbance, or other construction activity may occur until the proposed activity has been reviewed and any required  project permit  has been issued.

             (2)    This Chapter applies in unincorporated Skagit County to the following activities:

             (a)    New development means land disturbing activities, including Class IV general  forest practices  that are conversions from  timber land  to other uses; structural development, including construction or installation of a  building  or other  structure ; creation of  hard surfaces ; and  subdivision ,  short subdivision  and  binding site plans , as defined and applied in RCW Chapter  58.17 . Projects meeting the definition of redevelopment shall not be considered new development.

             (b)    Redevelopment means, on a site that is already substantially developed (has 35 percent or more of existing  hard surface  coverage), the creation or addition of  hard surfaces ; the expansion of a  building footprint  or addition or  replacement  of a  structure ; structural development including construction, installation or expansion of a  building  or other  structure ;  replacement  of  hard surface  that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities.

             (c)    Any activity requiring a land disturbance permit under SCC Chapter  14.30 .

             (d)    Any  land disturbing activity  that is not exempt from review under SCC Chapter  14.30 .

             (3)    This Chapter applies to all  applications  for  project permits  submitted to the County:

             (a)    On or after July 1, 2027;

             (b)    Prior to January 1, 2017, that have not started construction by July 1, 2022; and

             (c)    Prior to July 1, 2022, that have not started construction by July 1, 2027;

             (d)    Prior to July 1, 2027, that have not started construction by July 1, 2032.

             (4)    Exemptions. The following activities, as set forth in the  County’s NPDES permit , Appendix 1, are exempt from the minimum requirements of this Chapter:

             (a)     Forest Practices .  Forest practices  regulated under WAC Title  222 , except for Class IV general  forest practices  that are conversions from  timber land  to other uses.

             (b)    Commercial  Agriculture . Commercial  agriculture  practices involving production of crops or livestock; provided, that the conversion from timberland to  agriculture , and the construction of  impervious surfaces  are not exempt.

             (c)    Oil and Gas Field Activities or Operations. Construction of drilling sites, waste management pits, and access  roads , as well as construction of transportation and treatment infrastructure such as pipelines, natural gas treatment plants, natural gas pipeline compressor stations, and crude oil pumping stations are exempt. Operators are encouraged to implement and maintain  best management practices  to minimize erosion and control sediment during and after construction activities to help ensure protection of  surface water  quality during storm events

             (d)    Pavement Maintenance.

             (i)    The following pavement maintenance practices are exempt:

             (A)    Pothole and square cut patching;

             (B)    Overlaying existing asphalt or concrete pavement with asphalt or concrete without expanding the area of coverage;

             (C)    Shoulder  grading ;

             (D)    Reshaping/regrading  drainage  systems;

             (E)    Crack sealing;

             (F)    Resurfacing with in-kind material without expanding the  road  prism;

             (G)    Pavement preservation activities that do not expand the  road  prism; and

             (H)    Vegetation maintenance.

             (ii)    The following pavement maintenance practices are not categorically exempt, and are subject to the minimum requirements that are triggered when the thresholds identified for new or redevelopment projects are met under SCC  14.32.040  et seq.:

             (A)    Removing and replacing an asphalt or concrete pavement to base course or lower, or repairing the pavement base; these are considered replaced  hard surfaces .

             (B)    Extending the pavement edge without increasing the size of the  road  prism, or paving graveled shoulders; these are considered new  hard surfaces .

             (C)    Resurfacing by upgrading from dirt to gravel, a bituminous surface treatment (“chip seal”), asphalt, or concrete; upgrading from gravel to chip seal, asphalt, or concrete; or upgrading from chip seal to asphalt or concrete; these are considered new  impervious surfaces .

             (e)    Underground utility activities include installing, maintaining, and/or upgrading an underground utility.

             (i)    The limits of the exempt surfaces include only the area disturbed by the trench work necessary for the underground utility work (including any over-excavating necessary for the utility trench).

             (ii)    In order for an underground utility activity to be exempt, it cannot be part of, directly related to, or caused by a new development or redevelopment project.

             (iii)    Underground utility activities must replace the ground surface with in-kind material or materials with similar runoff characteristics.

             (iv)    Underground utility activities are subject to only I-3.4.2 MR2:  Construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan  (SWPPP). (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.030  Application requirements.

             (1)    All  applications  for a  project permit  require a  stormwater  site plan consistent with this Chapter.  Site plans  requiring MR 1-9 are required to be prepared by a registered land surveyor, civil engineer or other  qualified professional .

             (2)    All proposals for engineered  stormwater facilities  must be provided in a native/PDF electronic format.

             (3)    Security. The County may require liability insurance and a financial security to ensure performance of the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.040  Stormwater management manual.

             (1)    Skagit County adopts:

             (a)     Ecology ’s 2024  Stormwater Management Manual  for Western Washington, as subsequently amended, as the  stormwater management manual  for unincorporated Skagit County.

             (b)    The thresholds, definitions, minimum requirements and exceptions, adjustment and  variance  criteria found in Appendix 1 of the County’s current  NPDES permit .

             (c)    The following portions of WSDOT’s Standard Specifications for  Road , Bridge, and Municipal Construction:

             (i)    Section 6-11, Reinforced Concrete Walls.

             (ii)    Division 7,  Drainage  Structures, Storm Sewers, Sanitary Sewers, Water Mains, and Conduits.

             (iii)    Section 8-01, Erosion Control and Water  Pollution  Control.

             (iv)    Section 8-15, Riprap.

             (v)    Section 9-03, Aggregates.

             (vi)    Section 9-05,  Drainage  Structures and Culverts.

             (vii)    Section 9-13, Riprap, Quarry Spalls, Slope Protection, and Rock for Erosion and Scour Protection and Rock Walls.

             (d)    WSDOT Highway Runoff Manual.

             (2)    Within the Airport Environs Overlay the provisions of SCC  14.14.100 (3)(c)(iii) apply. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.050  Projects within the NPDES permit area—Nonresidential projects outside of the NPDES permit area.

             Any development or redevelopment, or other project subject to this chapter, that is wholly or partially inside the  NPDES permit area  or an  urban growth area  and non-single-family residential projects outside of the  NPDES permit area , must fully comply with the  County’s NPDES permit  and the  stormwater management manual . (Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.060  Residential projects outside the NPDES permit area.

             (1)    Single-family residential and single-family residential accessory projects that are wholly outside the  NPDES permit area  and an  urban growth area  that meet these criteria must comply with the  stormwater management manual ’s minimum requirements as modified in Subsection (2) of this Section.

             (a)    Minimum Requirements Nos. 1 through 9 are required for projects that meet any of the following criteria:

             (i)    Result in 10,000 square feet of new plus replaced  hard surface  area.

             (ii)    Result in 50 percent or greater  hard surface  coverage of the  lot .

             (iii)    Convert one and one-half acres or more of vegetation to lawn or landscaped area.

             (iv)    Convert five acres or more of natural vegetation to pasture.

             (v)    Include  grading  or filling that moves more than 500 cubic yards of material.

             (b)    Minimum Requirements Nos. 1 through 5 are required for projects that meet any of the following criteria:

             (i)    Result in 4,000 to 9,999 square feet of new plus replaced  hard surface .

             (ii)    Result in land disturbance of 14,000 square feet or more.

             (c)    Minimum Requirement No. 2, Construction  Stormwater  Pollution and Protection Plan (SWPPP), is required for all projects.

             (2)    Modified Minimum Requirements for Residential Projects Wholly Outside of the  NPDES Permit Area .

             (a)    Minimum Requirement No. 1,  Stormwater  Site Plan.

             (i)    The infiltration test for the  stormwater  site plan may be performed consistent with the simplified procedure provided by the  Department .

             (ii)    If the project does not include or require an engineered  stormwater facility , the  stormwater  site plan is not required to be prepared by a registered land surveyor or an engineer.

             (b)    Minimum Requirement No. 2, Construction  Stormwater  Pollution and Protection Plan. The  applicant  may use the model construction SWPPP provided by the  Department  if:

             (i)    The project is a residence or  residential accessory use ; and

             (ii)    The project does not require coverage under  Ecology ’s Construction  Stormwater  General Permit.

             (c)    Minimum Requirement No. 3, Source Control. Reserved.

             (d)    Minimum Requirement No. 4, Preservation of Natural  Drainage . Reserved.

             (e)    Minimum Requirement No. 5, On Site  Stormwater  Management.

             (i)    If the  application  is subject only to Minimum Requirement Nos. 1 through 5, the  applicant  may use any feasible BMP from the appropriate  stormwater management manual  list, and does not need to select BMPs in the prescribed order.

             (ii)    If the  application  is subject to Minimum Requirement Nos. 1 through 9, the  applicant  may use the  LID  performance standard or the appropriate  stormwater management manual  list.

             (iii)    Geotechnical Analysis. A geotechnical analysis must be required when:

             (A)     Grading  or the construction of  retention facilities ,  detention facilities , or other  stormwater  and  drainage facilities  is proposed within 200 feet of slopes steeper than 15 percent; or

             (B)    The  Director  deems that the proposed construction poses a potential hazard due to its proximity to a geologically hazardous area or Category I  aquifer  recharge area.

             (iv)    Soils Analysis. A soils analysis is required when the  Director  deems that existing soils maps of the project site are not of sufficient resolution to allow proper engineering analysis.

             (f)    Minimum Requirement No. 6, Runoff Treatment. Reserved.

             (g)    Minimum Requirement No. 7, Flow Control. Reserved.

             (h)    Minimum Requirement No. 8,  Wetlands  Protection. Reserved.

             (i)    Minimum Requirement No. 9, Operations and Maintenance. The  applicant  may use the BMP maintenance tables in Appendix V-A of the  stormwater management manual . (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20230007 § 1 (Att. 1); Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.070  Experimental best management practices (BMPs).

             (1)    Inside the  NPDES permit area , a development may use emerging  stormwater  treatment technologies that are approved by  Ecology ’s technology assessment protocol.

             (2)    Wholly outside the  NPDES permit area , experimental BMPs may be used to solve problems in a manner not addressed by the  stormwater management manual . The  Director  may:

             (a)    Approve experimental BMPs where there is substantial evidence that the experimental BMP will be as effective as a traditional BMP at controlling  stormwater  quality and quantity;

             (b)    Require that the performance of experimental BMPs be monitored to document their effectiveness for future use; or

             (c)    Require additional BMPs if the experimental BMPs fail to adequately control and treat  stormwater . (Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.080  Land uses and pollutant generating sources.

             Development that proposes  pollution  generating land uses may be required to include structural source control BMPs that are protective of water quality in accordance with  AKART . (Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.090  Adjustments and exceptions.

             (1)    Adjustments. The  Director  may grant an adjustment to the  application  of the  stormwater management manual  and its minimum requirements prior to permit approval and construction provided that written findings of fact are prepared that address the following:

             (a)    The adjustment provides substantially equivalent environmental protection.

             (b)    Based on sound engineering practices, the objectives of safety, function, environmental protection, and facility maintenance are met.

             (2)    Exceptions.

             (a)    The  Director  may grant an exception from this Chapter or the  application  of the  stormwater management manual  and its minimum requirements prior to permit approval and construction following legal public notice of an  application  for an exception or  variance , legal public notice of the  Director ’s decision on the  application , and written findings of fact that document the  Director ’s determination to grant an exception.

             (b)    The  Director  may grant an exception to the minimum requirements if such  application  imposes a severe and unexpected economic hardship.

             (i)    To determine whether the  application  imposes a severe and unexpected economic hardship on the project  applicant , the  Director  must consider and document, with written findings of fact, the following:

             (A)    The current (preproject) use of the site;

             (B)    How the  application  of the minimum requirement(s) restricts the proposed use of the site compared to restrictions that existed prior to the adoption of the minimum requirements;

             (C)    The possible remaining uses of the site if the exception were not granted;

             (D)    The uses of the site that would have been allowed prior to the adoption of the minimum requirements;

             (E)    A comparison of the estimated amount and percentage of value loss as a result of the minimum requirements versus the estimated amount and percentage of value loss as a result of requirements that existed prior to adoption of the minimum requirements; and

             (F)    The feasibility for the owner to alter the project to apply the minimum requirements.

             (ii)    The  Director  may not approve any exception unless the exception meets the following criteria:

             (A)    The exception will not increase risk to the public health and welfare, nor be injurious to other properties in the vicinity and/or downstream, and to the quality of waters of the State; and

             (B)    The exception is the least possible exception that could be granted to comply with the intent of the minimum requirements.

             (c)    Records. The  Director  must retain records, including the written findings of fact, of all exceptions from the minimum requirements.

             (3)    A request for an adjustment or exception must adequately describe the justification for relief and is subject to the type of review specified in SCC  14.06.150 . (Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.100  Critical drainage areas.

             To mitigate or eliminate potential stormwater-related impacts on critical  drainage  areas, the  Director  may require additional  stormwater  improvements in the following areas:

             (1)    All areas designated as  critical areas  under SCC Chapter  14.24 ;

             (2)    All lands within 200 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of water bodies possessing fish spawning and rearing habitat for anadromous and resident fish species, as designated by the State  Department  of Fish and Wildlife;

             (3)    Any lands that drain to a natural feature that is a closed depression, i.e., a low-lying area that has no surface outlet, or such a limited surface outlet that in most storm events, the area acts as a retention basin, holding water for infiltration, evaporation, or transpiration;

             (4)    Any lands that are established by law as fish or shellfish protection areas; and

             (5)    Any lands determined by the  Director  to have a high potential for  drainage  and water quality problems and/or are sensitive to the effects of construction or development. (Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.110  Basin planning.

             The County may use basin/watershed planning, as allowed under the  County’s NPDES permit , Appendix 1, Section 7. For a basin plan to serve as a means of modifying the minimum requirements of this Chapter, the plan must:

             (1)    Be formally adopted by all jurisdictions with responsibilities under the plan;

             (2)    All ordinances and regulations called for by the plan must be in effect; and

             (3)    The basin plan must be reviewed and approved by the  Department  of  Ecology . (Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.120  General stormwater management standards.

             (1)    All development must meet the following  performance standards  so that adjacent properties are not unreasonably burdened with  surface waters  resulting from such development.

             (a)    Runoff may not  discharge  directly onto the surface of a public or  private road .

             (b)    Runoff may not  discharge  into a  private road ’s ditch system except when the  lot  is within a recorded  subdivision  with an approved  stormwater facility  and the runoff is directed into that facility and will not exceed the capacity of the facility.

             (c)    Runoff may not  discharge  into a County  right-of-way , except (i) with the authorization of the Public Works  Director  or (ii) when the  lot  is within a recorded  subdivision  with an approved  stormwater facility , the runoff is directed into that facility, and will not exceed the capacity of the facility.

             (d)    Runoff may not  discharge  into a  drainage  district’s system without prior written authorization from the applicable  drainage  district.

             (e)    Runoff may not  discharge  directly into a  manure lagoon  or vault unless the lagoon or vault has been converted to only support  stormwater  with all flow control requirements.

             (f)    Runoff and infiltration must be directed away from septic drain fields.

             (g)    Runoff from  impervious surfaces , roof drains, and yard drains must be directed so as not to adversely affect adjacent properties, public properties and facilities, well protection  zones , unstable slopes, basement crawl spaces, and footing drains.

             (h)    Runoff from development may not cause a significant adverse impact to down-gradient properties.

             (2)    All  stormwater facilities  must be constructed consistent with the currently adopted International  Building  Code, International Residential Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, and other applicable codes.

             (3)    All  stormwater facilities  that include pipes and drains must meet the following minimum installation requirements:

             (a)    Footing and roof drains may not utilize the same pipe.

             (b)    Piping shall be glued using accepted manufactured adhesives or gasketed to prevent leakage.

             (c)    A one percent minimum ground slope away from the  structure  is required for installation of downspouts.

             (d)    Pipe covers and pipe bedding must be installed according to manufacturer’s specifications.

             (e)    Facilities must be inspected and approved by the County prior to use.

             (f)    Facilities must be cleaned of sediment prior to use. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.130  Erosion and sediment control.

             (1)    All development must control erosion and sedimentation during construction. In addition to the requirements of the  stormwater management manual , development must do the following:

             (a)    Stabilization of Exposed Soils. At all times of the year, sufficient materials, equipment, and labor must be readily available to stabilize and prevent erosion. All exposed, disturbed soils must be stabilized prior to any forecasted rain event.

             (b)    Delineation of  Clearing  and Easement Limits.  Clearing  limits,  setbacks ,  buffers , and sensitive or  critical areas  such as  steep slopes ,  wetlands ,  wellhead protection areas  and riparian corridors shall be clearly marked in the field and inspected by County staff (or where appropriate, by the  applicant ’s  critical areas  consultant) prior to commencement of  land clearing  activities.

             (c)    Construction Access Routes. Wherever construction vehicle access routes intersect paved  roads , provisions must be made to minimize the transport of sediment (mud) onto the paved  road  by use of appropriate BMPs such as a stabilized construction entrance. If sediment is transported onto a  road  surface, at a minimum, the  roads  must be thoroughly cleaned at the end of each day. Sediment must be removed from  roads  by shoveling or sweeping and be transported to a controlled sediment disposal area.  Street  washing is allowed only after sediment is removed in this manner and no  drainage  systems and/or wildlife habitat will be harmed by the flushing activity.

             (d)    Dewatering Construction Sites. Dewatering devices must  discharge  into an appropriate sediment trap or  pond  designed to accept such a  discharge , preceded by adequate energy dissipation, prior to runoff leaving the site.

             (e)    Control of  Pollutants  Other Than Sediment. All  pollutants  other than sediment that occur on site during construction must be handled and legally disposed of in a manner that does not cause contamination of  surface waters  and as otherwise required by SCC Chapter  16.32 .  Pollutants  of concern include, but are not limited to, fuels, lubricants, solvents, concrete byproducts, and construction materials. (Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.140  Low-impact development (LID) techniques and facilities.

             (1)    To minimize the  stormwater  impacts of development, the  low-impact development  (LID) techniques and facilities identified in the  stormwater management manual , the Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound (Puget Sound Partnership and WSU Extension, 2012), and this chapter are allowed, and encouraged, anywhere in unincorporated Skagit County.

             (a)     Permeable pavement  is encouraged in place of regular pavement to meet applicable  LID  requirements where feasible.  Permeable pavement  is the preferred approach to development. The  Director  must review and approve the utilization of alternative surfacing methods for compliance with other applicable regulations and development standards.

             (b)    Bioretention swales with compost-amended soils may be used, with the approval of the  Director .

             (c)    Upon request of the  Director , the  applicant  must provide copies of delivery tags and purchase statements for any installed  LID  facilities.

             (d)    In the event of a conflict between this Section and other  development regulations , the provisions of this Section apply.

             (2)    When  LID  Is Required.

             (a)     LID  techniques and facilities are required within the  NPDES permit area  where the  County’s NPDES permit  thresholds are exceeded and where feasible and outside the permit area where thresholds trigger implementation of the  stormwater  manual.

             (i)     LID  techniques are to be the preferred and most commonly used approach to site planning and development.

             (ii)     Applicants  must design  LID BMPs  to minimize  impervious surfaces ,  native vegetation  loss, and  stormwater  runoff in all types of development situations, where feasible.

             (iii)    The  applicant  must use the BMPs identified in the  stormwater management manual  where feasible for the site conditions.

             (iv)    The  Director  has authority to determine whether specific BMPs are feasible under the criteria provided in the  stormwater management manual .

             (b)    Projects subject to Minimum Requirement Nos. 1 through 9 must comply with the following:

             (i)    After the project is complete, there may not be a net increase in  impervious surface  above the limit on the permit, plat, or  site plan  without approval from the  Director .

             (ii)    For  subdivisions , the maximum  impervious surfaces  allowed for each  lot  must be added to the face of the plat.

             (iii)    For all other development, the maximum  impervious surface  allowed for the development must be added to the face of the final, approved  site plan .

             (c)     Applicants  must locate and design all  buildings ,  streets  and pathways, parking areas, and utility easements to promote public safety, ensure compatibility of uses, minimize effective  impervious surface , preserve  native vegetation , and complement predevelopment site characteristics such as topography, soils, hydrology, and other natural features.

             (3)    General Design Techniques for Achieving  LID  Goals.

             (a)    Limit  clearing  and  grading  to the minimum necessary for construction of  permitted uses  and associated utilities.

             (b)    Limit lawn areas,  driveways , and  roads  and locate them in a manner that results in the least disruption to the topography and  native vegetation  on the site.

             (c)    Cluster  lots ,  dwelling units , or  building  structures during the conceptual planning stage to preserve  open space , reduce total  impervious surface  area, and minimize development impacts on  critical areas  and associated  buffers .

             (4)    Maintenance. A maintenance plan consistent with SCC  14.32.170  is required. A landscape plan is required when plants are an essential part of the  LID BMP .

             (5)     Native Vegetation .

             (a)    To use existing vegetation as  native vegetation  for  stormwater  dispersion, the vegetation must be characterized by a minimum of one mature evergreen or deciduous tree per 400 square feet of area. Areas not meeting this standard must be planted consistent with BMP T5.30 from the  stormwater management manual .

             (b)    The duff layer and native topsoil on a project site should be retained in an undisturbed state to the maximum extent practicable to preserve the natural  stormwater  holding capacity.

             (c)    Where  native vegetation  is used to achieve Minimum Requirement No. 6 or 7, only the following are allowed:

             (i)    Permeable pedestrian  trails ;

             (ii)     Surface water  restoration projects;

             (iii)    Passive recreation;

             (iv)    Removal of invasive species;

             (v)    Planting of  native vegetation  from the Skagit County master tree/plant list of native species; and

             (vi)    Amendment of disturbed soils consistent with all applicable regulations.

             (d)    Where  native vegetation  is used to achieve Minimum Requirement No. 6 or 7, the  applicant  must establish one or more of the following permanent protective mechanisms to ensure that  native vegetation  is retained:

             (i)    A protective easement dedicated to the County;

             (ii)    A separate nonbuilding tract owned in common by all  lots  within the  subdivision ;

             (iii)    Restrictions on the future use of the area recorded on the face of the final plat; and

             (iv)    An alternative permanent protective mechanism approved by the  Director . (Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.150  Stormwater conveyance.

             (1)    Generally.

             (a)    All proposed developments must provide on-site  stormwater  conveyance with sufficient capacity to convey without flooding or otherwise damaging existing or proposed  structures , consistent with the  stormwater management manual .

             (b)     Stormwater  conveyance infrastructure must be sized per the approved  Ecology  method such as Western Washington hydrology model.

             (2)    Easements, Tracts, and Covenants.

             (a)     Drainage  easements must be provided in a proposed development for all  stormwater  and  drainage  conveyance systems that are not located in public rights-of-way or tracts and must be granted to the parties responsible for providing ongoing maintenance of the systems.  Drainage  structures through non-drainage easements are prohibited.

             (b)     Drainage  easements must be clearly shown on the face of all final plats and must be contained in any covenants required for a development.

             (c)     Drainage  easement width shall be per the chart below unless otherwise approved by the  Director .

                          For Pipes:
 Inside Diameter (ID)

                          Easement Width

                         ID ≤ 36"

                         Depth to invert &lt; 8':10'
Depth to invert &gt; 8':15'

                         36" &lt; ID ≤ 60"

                         Depth to invert &lt; 8':10'
Depth to invert &gt; 8':15'

                         ID &gt; 60"

                          ID plus 10'

                          For Channels and Swales:
 Top Width of Channel (W)

                          Easement Width

                         W ≤ 10'

                         W plus 10' on one side
W if no access required

                         10' &lt; W ≤ 30'

                         W plus 15' on one side

                         W &gt; 30'

                         W plus 15' on both sides

             (3)     Wetlands .  Stormwater  discharges to  wetlands  are allowed only when consistent with the  stormwater management manual , including Minimum Requirement No. 8 and Appendix I-C of the  stormwater management manual .

             (4)    Regional Facilities.

             (a)    A regional facility is a  stormwater  BMP that may provide runoff treatment and flow control to more than one property. Regional  stormwater facilities  may be used as an alternative method of meeting Minimum Requirement Nos. 5, 6, 7 and 8.

             (b)    Regional facilities are designed, reviewed, and approved based on  impervious surfaces  anticipated with full development within the basin that drains to the facility.

             (i)    Once approved, a regional facility may be used for future development provided the regional facility is operational prior to development and has capacity for any future development that proposes to rely on it for compliance.

             (ii)    The owner/operator of a regional  stormwater facility  must track  impervious surfaces  within the basin to determine how much actual capacity remains for use by future projects. This data must be provided to Skagit County upon request.

             (iii)    A regional  stormwater facility ’s flow control/treatment capacity may not be exceeded.

             (iv)    A development agreement pursuant to SCC Chapter  14.58  may include appropriate provisions to ensure re-review and, if warranted, additional runoff treatment and/or flow control to ensure compliance with  stormwater  requirements and standards that may apply to future development. Provisions of any development agreements must allow for and ensure compliance with the permit.

             (c)    An existing regional facility proposed to be used to meet  stormwater  requirements for a development  application  will be reviewed for compliance with the  stormwater  requirements and standards applicable to the development  application  as set forth in the permit and the Skagit County Code.

             (i)    Regional facilities, except those serving single-family residences, are subject to review 20 years after the permit issued for construction of the facility. Regional facilities constructed prior to June 30, 2022, are not subject to review prior to June 30, 2032.

             (ii)    Such review is limited to the impact on the regional facility by the proposed use set forth in the development  application , including an analysis of whether the regional facility has remaining capacity to receive  stormwater  discharges from the proposed project.

             (iii)    If a regional facility does not have the capacity to meet current  stormwater  requirements for a development  application  the deficiencies may be addressed by retrofitting the existing facility or constructing new facilities, or both. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.160  Final inspections and approval.

             (1)    Long-Term Maintenance Required.

             (a)    For projects that must meet only Minimum Requirement Nos. 1 through 5,  stormwater  BMPs must be maintained in accordance with original approval and County standards.

             (b)    For projects that must meet Minimum Requirement Nos. 1 through 9, prior to the use of a  stormwater  treatment and/or flow control BMP/facility required by this Chapter, the owner must:

             (i)    Ensure a complete initial evaluation of the  stormwater facility  system components and property by a  qualified professional  to determine functionality, maintenance needs, and compliance with this Chapter and any permits. The  property owner  must submit the signed and stamped engineer’s evaluation to the  Director  for approval;

             (ii)    Provide to Skagit County a complete and accurate set of reproducible  as-built record drawings ;

             (iii)    For an engineered  stormwater facility , have the  as-built record drawings  stamped and certified as accurate by a  qualified professional ;

             (iv)    Obtain approval from the  Director  for a maintenance plan; and

             (v)    Record the approved maintenance plan with the County Auditor against the title of all properties using and which contain the  stormwater  infrastructure and facilities, or record an affidavit indicating the location of the approved  stormwater facility  maintenance plan within Skagit County records.

             (c)    The maintenance plan must:

             (i)    Address how all of the elements of the  stormwater facility  will be maintained;

             (ii)    Include the schedule for ongoing maintenance;

             (iii)    Identify the responsible party for ongoing maintenance; and

             (iv)    Be consistent with the  stormwater management manual .

             (d)    The maintenance plan remains in force for the life of the development or until the County approves a new or amended maintenance plan for the development’s  stormwater facilities .

             (e)    For  LID  facilities, the facility must be protected from all of the following:

             (i)    Cover by  structures  or impervious material;

             (ii)    Soil compaction, for example by vehicular traffic or livestock;

             (iii)    Damage by soil removal and  grade  alteration; and

             (iv)    Conversion to another use.

             (2)    Inspections of  Stormwater  Infrastructure and Facilities.

             (a)    Where a  stormwater  treatment and/or flow control BMP/facility is required by this Chapter, the  applicant  must dedicate an easement to the County for access and inspection consistent with this Chapter and during normal business hours, and when inspectors provide advance notice. The  Director  may waive this requirement for small facilities that do not require inspection or can be effectively inspected without an access easement.

             (b)    Inside the  NPDES permit area , County inspection of  stormwater  treatment and/or flow control BMP/facility including source control is required at least annually, or less frequently if allowed by the  County’s NPDES permit .

             (c)    Outside the  NPDES permit area , the  Director  is authorized to develop an inspection program, including requirements for an inspection and maintenance schedule, to determine if  stormwater facilities  are in good working order and are properly maintained, and to ensure that  stormwater  BMPs are in place and that non-point source  pollution  control is being implemented.

             (d)    Whenever there is cause to believe that a violation of this Chapter has been or is being committed, the County may inspect per SCC Chapter  14.09 , Enforcement Procedures.

             (e)    Nothing in this Section limits the County’s authority to inspect facilities under SCC Chapter  16.32 .

             (3)    County Acceptance of  Stormwater Facilities .

             (a)    Skagit County may, at the  Director ’s sole discretion, accept  stormwater facilities  for maintenance.

             (b)    Only those facilities that meet the following conditions will be considered for acceptance:

             (i)    For residential  subdivisions , improvements have been completed on at least 80 percent of the  lots , unless waived by the  Director ;

             (ii)    The facility has been inspected by the County and accepted by the  Director  and has been in satisfactory operation for at least two years;

             (iii)    If the facility was reconstructed during the maintenance period, it has been accepted by the  Director ;

             (iv)    The facility as designed and constructed conforms to the provisions of this Chapter and, if necessary, is retrofitted to meet current  stormwater  design standards;

             (v)    All easements and tracts required under this Chapter entitling the County to operate and maintain the facility have been conveyed to Skagit County and have been recorded with the Skagit County Auditor;

             (vi)    An operation and maintenance manual including a maintenance schedule has been submitted to and accepted by Skagit County; and

             (vii)    The  applicant  has provided to Skagit County a complete and accurate set of reproducible hard copy and electronic  as-built record drawings  stamped and certified as accurate by a  qualified professional  and accompanied by an approved maintenance plan. (Ord. O20260004 § 1 (Att. 2); Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. O20240005 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.170  Operation and maintenance.

             (1)    Owners and operators of  stormwater facilities  must operate and maintain those facilities to ensure the performance of those facilities achieves the intended purposes.

             (2)    Owners of property for which a  stormwater  BMP has been required by Skagit County must continually maintain that BMP.

             (3)    Maintenance must be performed consistent with the  stormwater management manual  and any other conditions of approval and the approved maintenance plan, unless a more restrictive provision applies. When an inspection identifies an exceedance of the maintenance standard, the owner must perform maintenance:

             (a)    Within 12 months for typical maintenance of facilities, except catch basins;

             (b)    Within six months for catch basins;

             (c)    Within 24 months for maintenance that requires capital construction of less than $25,000. (Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))

        14.32.180  Severability.

             If any provision or clause of this Chapter or its  application  to any  person  or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or  applications  of this Chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or  application , and to this end the provisions of this Chapter are severable. (Ord. O20220006 § 1 (Att. 3))