Chapter 14.76 STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL LAND DIVISIONS

         Chapter 14.76
STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL LAND DIVISIONS

             Sections:

              14.76.200    One-acre segregation for agricultural land preservation.

              14.76.300    One-acre-lot Urban Reserve Residential (URR) land divisions.

              14.76.400    Unit lot subdivisions.

        14.76.200  One-acre segregation for agricultural land preservation.

             (1)    Purpose. This Section is intended to encourage long-term conservation of agricultural land.

             (2)    Applicability. This Section applies to a  lot  that:

             (a)    Consists predominantly of lowland prime soils (as defined by the  Department ’s “Farmland Soils Map”); and

             (b)    Is zoned Agricultural—Natural Resource Land or Rural Resource—Natural Resource Land.

             (3)    Creation of a Substandard  Residential Lot .

             (a)    The owner of an existing house on a qualifying  lot  may create a substandard  residential lot  in consideration for placing a  conservation easement  per Subsection (4) of this Section on the balance of the property by means of:

             (i)    A  short subdivision , in cases involving a single  legal lot ;

             (ii)    A  boundary line adjustment , in cases involving multiple  legal lots  (where the net number of  lots  will not be increased).

             (b)    If the  lot  has more than one  residential structure  existing as of September 11, 1996, then separate  lots  may be created for each such primary residence.

             (c)    The substandard  residential lot  to be created must include the existing house and is limited to one acre in size unless site constraints preclude placement of a well or septic system, in which case it must be the minimum necessary to accommodate a well and septic system.

             (d)     Critical areas  review per SCC Chapter  14.24  is not required for the purpose of this segregation unless additional development, including a new well or septic system, is contemplated as part of the segregation. Any subsequent development on the segregated  lot  is subject to standard  critical areas  review. Water and septic review is not required for the portion of the  lot  being conserved.

             (4)    Agricultural  Conservation Easement . The  property owner  must grant a  conservation easement  under the provisions of RCW  64.04.130  on the remainder of the property. The  conservation easement  must:

             (a)    Extinguish future residential development rights;

             (b)    Limit use of the property to agricultural production;

             (c)    Be on forms acceptable to the  Department  and the Skagit County Farmland Legacy Program;

             (d)    By its terms remain in effect until a court of competent jurisdiction finds that it is no longer possible to commercially use the property for the production of food or agricultural products;

             (e)    Be granted to Skagit County or a substantially similar  conservation easement  to a nonprofit Skagit County based land trust or other qualified conservation organization as defined in RCW  84.34.250 . (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.76.300  One-acre-lot Urban Reserve Residential (URR) land divisions.

             (1)    Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to prescribe standards for the creation of one-acre  lots  in the Urban Reserve Residential UGA  zone  while requiring shadow platting of the remainder of the  land division  to facilitate provision of future  urban services  and urban  lot  sizes.

             (2)    Applicability. This Section applies to  short subdivisions  (one to four  lots ) of property that is both:

             (a)    Within the Urban Reserve Residential (URR) UGA  zone ; and

             (b)    Within the relevant  city ’s URR  overlay zone  for one-acre  lot  development pursuant to Subsection (3) of this Section.

             (3)    Designation of  Overlay Zone .

             (a)    A  city  with a portion of their UGA zoned URR may designate all or a portion of that URR  zone  to allow one-acre  lot  development prior to annexation and extension of  urban services . To accomplish that designation, the  city  must amend its  comprehensive plan  designation and adopt an  overlay zone  for the area to designate it appropriate for one-acre  lot  development.

             (b)    The  city  comprehensive plan amendment and zoning overlay amendment must include findings that demonstrate how the area proposed for one-acre  lot  development meets all of the following criteria:

             (i)    The  city  has determined the area can be served with extension of  city  sewer within six years from the date of  development approval .

             (ii)    The  city  will limit the number of one-acre  lots  created to four  lots  per  lot  that exists as of the date of the request for the one-acre  lot  development.

             (iii)    The  city  has determined that a  development proposal ’s payment of  city  impact fees, if any are adopted and required, is adequate mitigation of the public facilities or services for which the impact fees were collected.

             (iv)    The  city  has determined that reviewing and approving a one-acre plat for the area would not preclude future extension of urban infrastructure and services to the area or to other portions of the unincorporated UGA and would not interfere with ultimate future development of the area platted at minimum urban densities, consistent with the  city ’s planning and zoning designations for this portion of the  city  UGA.

             (4)    Preliminary Approval  Application  Requirements. In addition to the  application  requirements of SCC  14.74.100 , an  application  for a preliminary approval of a  land division  under this Section requires submission of a shadow plat.

             (a)    The shadow plat must demonstrate how the property can be further subdivided and developed in the future at the minimum urban densities required by the  city ’s residential zoning.

             (b)    The shadow plat must show proposed future urban  lot  lines and proposed future urban infrastructure sufficient for the County to verify that the current  development proposal  will not preclude future urban infill of the property when it is annexed to the  city  and  urban services  are provided.

             (c)    The shadow plat is not to be recorded as  lot  lines or other restriction on the property, but must be retained by the County to assist the  property owner  and the County or  city  in achieving future urban development of the property after annexation and extension of  urban services .

             (d)    The shadow plat may be used by the County in reviewing and approving the locations of  structures  within the  lots  being developed, as part of  building permit  review.

             (e)    The future urban  lot  lines and future urban infrastructure locations shown on the shadow plat may be modified administratively by the County, at the request of the  property owner , provided the County consults with the  city  in whose UGA the property is located before doing so and provided any such modification protects the ability to develop the property in the future at urban densities.

             (f)    Creation of additional  lots  at urban densities in the future requires annexation to the  city  in whose UGA the property is located and a future  subdivision ,  binding site plan  or short plat approval, whichever is applicable, pursuant to the applicable  city  subdivision regulations.

             (5)    Review and Approval. The  decisionmaker  must include conditions or limitations in the preliminary approval to:

             (a)    Ensure adequate utilities,  public services , and infrastructure prior to annexation; and

             (b)    Facilitate development at full urban densities after annexation.

             (6)    Final Approval  Application  Requirements. In addition to the  application  requirements of SCC  14.74.200 , an  application  for final approval of a  land division  under this Section requires:

             (a)    The plat must contain the following note on the face of the plat or  site plan  indicating that the County has on file shadow-plat information demonstrating how the site may be further developed at urban densities in the future:

             This  subdivision  was approved together with a shadow-plat showing that this property could be developed at a density of 4  dwelling units  per acre at a future date. Before any further  subdivision  or  structures  are constructed on this site, the  Department  must review the shadow-plat as part of the  project permit  review to ensure that said development is in conformance with the shadow-plat.

             (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))

        14.76.400  Unit lot subdivisions.

             (1)    Purpose. The purposes of this Section are:

             (a)    To provide rules, regulations, and standards governing the approval of  unit lot subdivisions ; and

             (b)    To provide another tool that allows for individual ownership of individual unit(s) that share a  lot .

             (2)    Applicability.

             (a)    A  unit lot subdivision  may be used in any development with two or more  dwelling units  meeting the standards of this Section.

             (b)    A  unit lot subdivision  may also be used to subdivide an  accessory dwelling unit  from the principal  structure .

             (c)    A  unit lot subdivision  may be combined with a  subdivision  or  short subdivision  so long as the portion of the development utilizing this Section meets the requirements of this Section.

             (3)    General Provisions.

             (a)    Development on the  parent lot , rather than individual  unit lots , must comply with the applicable standards for the underlying  zone .

             (b)    Parking required for a  dwelling unit  may be provided on a different  unit lot  than the  unit lot  with the  dwelling unit  for which the parking serves, as long as the right to use the parking is included in notes on the face of the plat or formalized by an easement recorded with the Skagit County Auditor’s Office.

             (c)    Portions of the  lot  not subdivided for individual  unit lots  must be owned in common by the owners of the individual  unit lots , or by a homeowners’ association consisting of the owners of the individual  unit lots .

             (d)     Unit lots  may not be further divided by additional  unit lot subdivisions .

             (e)    Notes must be placed on the face of the short plat or plat that state:

             (i)    The title of the plat including the phrase “ Unit Lot Subdivision .”

             (ii)    Approval of the development on each  unit lot  was granted by the review of the  parent lot .

             (iii)    Subsequent  subdivision  sections, additions, or modifications to unit structure(s) may not create or increase any nonconformity of the  parent lot .

             (f)    Access easements, joint use and maintenance agreements, and covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) identifying the rights and responsibilities of  property owners  and homeowners’ association must be executed for use and maintenance of common garage, parking, and vehicle access areas; bike parking;  solid waste  collection areas; underground utilities; common  open space ; shared interior walls; exterior  building  facades and roofs; and other similar features. (Ord. O20250005 § 2 (Exh. A))