Ch. 19.32 Land Divisions | Anacortes Municipal Code

 Skip to main content

		Loading…

	 Anacortes, WA

		Municipal Code

				   Home

					   Title 19 Div. 3

					   Title 19 Div. 3

					   Ch. 19.34

			 Toggle site navigation

			 Menu

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 3, Permits
  Ch. 19.32, Land Divisions

						   Home

							   Contents

						   Track

							Legislative History

								Historic Versions

								Pending Updates

								Recent Updates

						   Share

							This Page

							Your Selections

						   Settings

						   Help

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 3, Permits
  Ch. 19.32, Land Divisions

	    Chapter 19.32   LAND DIVISIONS

			 Search Within This

	   This chapter is included in your selections.

 Sections:

   19.32.010   Purpose.

   19.32.020   Applicability.

   19.32.030   Preliminary land division approval—Application requirements.

   19.32.040   Preliminary land division approval—Criteria for decision.

   19.32.050   Procedures for review—Specific land division types.

   19.32.060   Final plat application requirements.

   19.32.070   Review criteria for approval of final subdivisions.

   19.32.080   Subdivision alteration and vacation.

   19.32.090   Violations—Penalty.

    19.32.010   Purpose.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   To provide criteria, regulations, processes, and standards to govern the  division of land  within the  city .

    B.   To ensure that public facilities and services necessary to support  development  are adequate to serve  development  at the time  development  occurs.

    C.   To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the  city  in accordance with standards established by the state  subdivision  law, as established by RCW  58.17.010 .

    D.   To guide the future growth and  development  of the  city  in accordance with the goals and policies of the Anacortes  comprehensive plan .  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.32.020   Applicability.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   This chapter applies to all divisions or redivisions of land applied for after the  effective date  of the ordinance codified in this chapter, except as listed in subsection  B  of this section.  Subdivisions ,  short subdivisions ,  binding site plans ,  unit lot subdivisions ,  plat   alterations , and  plat  vacations are all considered divisions or redivisions of land for purposes of this chapter.

    B.   This chapter does not apply to:

      1.   Cemeteries and other burial plots while used for that purpose.

      2.   Divisions of land into  lots  or  tracts  each of which is five acres or larger if the land is not capable of description as a fraction of a section of land, including the area bordering on a street or road which would be bounded by the centerline of the street or road and the side  lot  lines of the  lot  running perpendicular to such center line.

      3.   Divisions made by testamentary provisions or the laws of descent.

      4.   Divisions for the purpose of lease when no residential  structure  other than  manufactured homes  or travel trailers are permitted to be placed upon the land and an enforceable,  binding site plan  has been approved in accordance with the  binding site plan  provisions of this chapter, and which:

        a.   Identifies and shows the areas and location of all streets, roads, improvements, utilities, and  open spaces .

        b.   Contains inscriptions or attachments setting forth the limitations and conditions for the use of the land as are established by the  City Council .

      5.   Divisions made in connection with acquisition of land by the  city , including divisions made by deed for road widening purposes; provided, that such land may be accepted on behalf of the  city  by action of the  City Council .

      6.   Adjustments of boundary lines in accordance with AMC Chapter  19.34 ,  Boundary Line Adjustments .

      7.   Divisions of land into  lots  or  tracts  less than three acres that is recorded in accordance with Chapter  58.09  RCW and is used or to be used for the purpose of establishing a site for construction and operation of consumer-owned or investor-owned electric utility facilities per RCW  58.17.040(9) .

      8.   Divisions of land for the purpose of leasing land for facilities providing personal wireless services while used for that purpose.

      9.   Divisions of land for the purpose of dedicating to the public such  tracts  of lands for  open spaces , drainage ways, roads, alleys, easements, parks, playgrounds, sites for  schools ,  school  grounds, water supplies, sanitary wastes and other general purposes that may be required to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

      10.   Condominiums, pursuant to RCW  58.17.040(7) .  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.32.030   Preliminary land division approval—Application requirements.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Preliminary Approval.   All land division applications must be submitted in conformance with AMC  19.20.110  and contain the following:

      1.   Application.   A completed application form and application fees.

      2.   Title Report.   A title report issued within 30  days  of application, showing all  persons  having ownership interest, a legal description describing exterior boundary of the land to be subdivided and listing all encumbrances affecting the land.

      3.   SEPA.   A completed and  signed  environmental (SEPA) checklist if the  division of land  is not exempt under WAC  197-11-800  and AMC Chapter  18.04 , State Environmental Policy Act.

      4.   Grading.   A preliminary  grading  plan in accordance with AMC Chapter  19.78 , Clearing and  Grading , and showing proposed cuts and fills for public improvements and private  development , including transitions between the subject and adjacent properties.

     5.   Stormwater.

        a.   A preliminary  stormwater  management plan including runoff calculations, documentation that the minimum technical requirements of the  Stormwater Management Manual  for Western Washington, as adopted by the  city , have been met, upstream and downstream analysis, a maintenance plan for any new  stormwater facilities  and existing and proposed drainage facilities for the site and adjacent areas as specified by the engineer, and feasibility analysis of using  LID  facilities, all consistent with AMC Chapter  19.76 ,  Stormwater .

        b.   The results of a (wet and dry season) soil analysis of the project site to determine the feasibility of on-site  stormwater  infiltration.

      6.   A  tree  preservation plan in accordance with AMC Chapter  16.50 ,  Tree  Preservation.

      7.   Supplemental Studies and Reports.   Any related information and/or studies identified in the pre-application conference meeting, or deemed necessary by the  Director , including but not limited to a traffic study, geotechnical report, critical areas report and mitigation plan, and  landscape  plans.

      8.   Preliminary Plans.   A set of full-size plans containing the following information (multiple sheets may be used in order to provide clarity):

        a.   The name of the proposed project, if any.

        b.   The name, address, seal and signature of the land surveyor who prepared the  preliminary plat  map.

        c.   The date the  preliminary plat  map was prepared or revised, the scale, north arrow, and quarter section, section, township and range.

        d.   Full and correct legal description of lands being subdivided.

        e.   A vicinity sketch clearly showing the location of the property.

        f.   Accurate lines to scale showing the parcel to be subdivided, the  block  lines, and the  lot  lines.

        g.   Dimensions and numbers or description for each  lot  and  tract .

        h.   Total acreage and square feet of land to be divided and the land area by acreage and square feet of each of the proposed  lots .

        i.   Density calculations indicating maximum and minimum density requirements, if applicable for the proposal, and including density bonus calculations, if applicable.

        j.   Existing zoning and zoning boundaries on the site and immediately adjacent property.

        k.   Municipal boundaries, township lines, and section lines.

        l.    Setback lines  for all proposed  lots  having unusual shape, steep topography, critical areas, wetlands or other environmental or unusual limitations on the  building site .

        m.   Location, width, and names of all existing and proposed streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the proposed  subdivision . Road profiles may be required.

        n.   Location of existing and proposed improvements such as  stormwater facilities , sidewalks, utilities, power poles, etc., within the boundaries of the lands being subdivided and adjacent  lots  and  rights-of-way .

        o.   Location of existing and proposed easements or  tracts  to be dedicated for any public purpose or for the common use of the property owners of the lands being divided.

        p.   Location of existing  structures , septic tanks, drain fields, wells and other improvements located on the site and within 50 feet of the  development ; and whether such  structures  are proposed to remain on the property.

        q.   Shorelines and critical areas as defined in AMC Chapters  19.70 , Critical Areas and  Essential Public Facilities , and  18.16 , Shoreline Master Plan.

        r.   A current topographic survey. Contour lines in areas to be developed must be at two-foot intervals, or as specified by the  City  Engineer. Five-foot intervals may be used in areas not to be developed. All contour lines must be extended into adjacent properties at least 300 feet to show the topographical relationship of adjacent property to the proposed  development .

        s.   A legend identifying all existing and proposed boundary lines, buffers, drainage facilities and utilities, roadway sections, erosion control facilities,  grading  and critical areas,  landscape  features, and other required items specified above.

        t.   A  stormwater   site plan  prepared pursuant to the chapters on minimum technical requirements and site planning, preparation of  stormwater   site plans , in the  Stormwater Management Manual .

      9.   Reduced-Size Plans.   A reduced-size vicinity map and  site plan  showing proposed  lot  layout (suitable for public notice purposes).

      10.   Detailed Requirements.   The  Director  is authorized to provide more detailed requirements for each of the items required for submittal of a complete  preliminary plat  or  final plat  application, including size, scale, number of copies, and content.  (Ord. 4022 § 1 (Att. A), 2022; Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.32.040   Preliminary land division approval—Criteria for decision.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

 Each proposed preliminary land division must be reviewed to ensure that:

    A.   The proposal conforms to the requirements of this chapter and Chapter  58.17  RCW.

    B.   The proposal conforms to the form and intensity standards in AMC Chapter  19.42 , Form and Intensity Standards, for the zone in which the property is located. Proposals using the  unit lot subdivision  process must conform to the applicable use standards for the proposed use type in AMC  19.43.010 .

    C.   The proposal conforms to the community design standards in Division  5  of this title, including:

      1.   AMC Chapter  19.51 ,  Public Street  Improvements Required.

      2.   AMC Chapter  19.52 ,  Public Street  Design.

      3.   AMC Chapter  19.53 , Private Driveways and Access.

      4.   AMC Chapter  19.54 ,  Subdivision  Design and  Block   Structure .

    D.   The proposal conforms to the standards of:

      1.   AMC Chapter  16.50 ,  Tree  Preservation.

      2.   AMC Chapter  19.70 , Critical Area Regulations.

      3.   AMC Chapter  19.22 , Concurrency.

      4.   AMC Chapter  19.76 ,  Stormwater , including  stormwater  infiltration when feasible.

    E.   The proposed land division:

      1.   Makes adequate provision for parks, recreation, and playgrounds.

      2.   Makes adequate provision for  schools  and  school  grounds.

      3.   Makes adequate provisions for sidewalks and other planning features that meet the requirements of this title and that provide safe walking conditions for students who walk to and from  school .

      4.   Serves the public interest and makes appropriate provisions for the public health, safety, and welfare.

    F.   Lack of compliance with the criteria in subsections    (A)  through  (E)    of this section will be grounds for denial of a proposed land division or for the issuance of conditions necessary to more fully satisfy the criteria.

    G.   Phasing.   Where a land division is to be developed in phases with a  final plat  approved and recorded separately for each phase, the following applies:

      1.   The  applicant  must request approval of phasing in the preliminary land division application.

      2.   Each separate phase is required to meet the requirements of the criteria above and all other applicable  city  codes when considered independently from any other phase.

      3.   Where an  applicant  requests phasing after preliminary land division approval has been granted, phasing may be approved only through modification of the preliminary  subdivision  approval using the preliminary land division approval procedures in AMC  19.20.030 .  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.32.050   Procedures for review—Specific land division types.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

   A.   Preliminary Short Subdivision Procedures.

      1.   Approval Process.    Short subdivisions  follow the procedures established in AMC  19.20.030 .

      2.   Effect of Preliminary Approval.   Preliminary approval constitutes authorization for the  applicant  to  develop  the required facilities and improvements, upon review and approval of construction drawings by the Public Works  Department . All such facilities and improvements must be completed or have a performance assurance guarantee posted to ensure completion as provided in AMC  19.51.070 , prior to recording of the  short subdivision . All  development  of a  short subdivision  must be subject to any conditions imposed by the  city  on the  short subdivision  approval.

      3.   Revision and Expiration.    Short subdivisions  follow the revision and expiration procedures established in AMC Chapter  19.28 , Permit Revision and Expiration.

      4.   Recording.   All  short subdivisions  must be recorded in compliance with the following:

        a.   Prior to recording, the  applicant  must submit the  final short plat  map to the  city  for signatures per subsection  C  of this section and AMC  19.32.060 .

        b.   Recording Required.   No  short subdivision  may be recorded unless approved as provided in this chapter. A copy of an approved  short subdivision  must be filed for record with the Skagit County Auditor, and one reproducible copy must be furnished to the  city .

      5.   Restriction on Further Division.   Land within an approved and recorded  short subdivision  may not be further subdivided within a period of five years from the date of final approval if such further division would result in more than nine  lots  within the original  short subdivision  boundaries. Any division that would result in more than nine  lots  within the original  short subdivision  within the five-year period may be accomplished only by following the process for preliminary and final  long subdivision  approval in this section.

   B.   Preliminary Long Subdivision Procedures.

      1.   Approval Process.   Preliminary  long subdivisions  follow the procedures established in AMC  19.20.030 .

      2.   Effect of Preliminary Approval.   Preliminary approval constitutes authorization for the  applicant  to  develop  the required facilities and improvements, upon review and approval of construction drawings by the Public Works  Department . All such facilities and improvements must be completed or have a performance assurance posted to ensure completion, as provided in AMC  19.51.070 , prior to recording of the  long subdivision . All  development  must be subject to any conditions imposed by the  city  on the preliminary  long subdivision  approval.

      3.   Revisions and Expiration.    Long subdivisions  follow the revision and expiration procedures established in AMC Chapter  19.28 , Permit Revision and Expiration.

   C.   Final Subdivision Procedures.

      1.    Final plats  must be submitted in accordance with AMC  19.32.060  and  19.32.070 .

      2.   Review.   The  final plat  must be reviewed to ensure that the following have been completed:

        a.   The proposed  final plat  meets all standards established by state law and this section relating to the  final plat ’s drawings and  subdivision  improvements.

        b.   The proposed  final plat  bears the certificates and statements of approval required by this section.

        c.   A current title insurance report furnished by the subdivider confirms the title of the land in the proposed  subdivision  is  vested  in the name of the owners whose signatures appear on the  final plat .

        d.   The legal description of the  plat  boundary on the current title insurance report agrees with the legal description on the  final plat .

        e.   The facilities and improvements required to be provided by the subdivider have been completed or, alternatively, that the subdivider has provided a surety in an amount commensurate with improvements remaining to be completed per AMC  19.51.070 .

        f.   The surveyor has certified that all survey monument  lot  corners are in place and visible.

        g.   The  final plat  contains a dedication to the public of all common improvements, including but not limited to streets, roads, sewage disposal systems, storm drainage systems, and water supply systems which were a condition of approval. The intention to dedicate must be evidenced by the owner’s presentment of a  final plat  showing the dedication, and the acceptance by the  city  must be evidenced by the approval of the  final plat .

      3.   Review of Final Long Subdivisions.   The  City Council  must review the  final plat  at a public meeting, according to the review criteria for  final plats  in AMC  19.32.070 . No public hearing is required. If the  City Council  approves the  final plat , the Mayor is authorized to inscribe and execute the written approval on the face of the  plat  map. If the  City Council  denies the  final plat , the  final plat  will be returned to the  applicant  with reasons for denial and conditions for compliance.

      4.   Review of Final Short Subdivisions.   The  Director  must review the  final short plat  according to the criteria for  final plats  set forth in AMC  19.32.070 .

      5.   Recording.   All  final plats  must be recorded in compliance with the following:

        a.   Fees and Performance Assurance.   Prior to recording, the  applicant  must submit the original  final plat  drawings together with the  plat  checking fees. Unless all required improvements have been constructed prior to  final plat  approval, the  applicant  must also submit all required performance assurances to guarantee completion of the improvements as required by AMC  19.51.070 .

        b.   Recording Required.   No  final plat  may be recorded unless approved as provided in this section. The original of an approved  final plat  must be filed for record with the Skagit County Auditor.

        c.   Time Limit.   All  final plats  must be recorded within 60  days  after final approval is granted by the  city . Approval must expire if the  final plat  is not recorded within this period.

   D.   Unit Lot Subdivisions.

      1.   Approval Process.    Unit lot subdivisions  follow the procedures established in AMC  19.20.030  for  short subdivision  or  long subdivision , according to the number of  unit   lots  proposed. Final  unit lot subdivisions  of 10 or more  lots  follow the procedures for final  long subdivision  in subsection  C  of this section.

      2.   Compliance with Prior Approvals.   Sites developed or proposed to be developed with duplexes, triplexes, cottages and townhouses per the standards in AMC  19.43.010  may be subdivided into individual  unit   lots  as provided herein. The  development  as a whole must conform to the regulations applicable to the site and zone and to applicable plans that were granted approval through provisions of this code.

      3.    Development  on individual  unit   lots  is not required to conform with all  development  standards that typically apply to individual  lots  as long as the parent  lot  conforms to all such  development  standards.

      4.   Subsequent platting actions, additions, or modifications to the  structure (s) may not create or increase any nonconformity of the parent  lot .

      5.   Access easements, joint use and maintenance agreements, and covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) identifying the rights and responsibilities of property owners and/or the homeowners’ association must be executed for use and maintenance of common  garage , parking and vehicle access areas; underground utilities; common  open space ; exterior  building   facades  and roofs; and other similar features must be recorded with the Skagit County Auditor.

      6.   Within the parent  lot , required parking for a  dwelling unit  may be provided on a different  unit   lot  than the  lot  with the  dwelling unit , as long as the right to use the parking is formalized by an easement recorded with the Skagit County Auditor.

      7.   Notes must be placed on the face of the  plat  or  short plat  as recorded with the Skagit County Auditor to acknowledge the following:

        a.   Approval of the design of the  unit  on each of the  lots  was granted by the review of the  development , as a whole, on the parent  lot  per the standards of AMC Chapter  19.43 , Residential Uses.

        b.    Development , redevelopment, or rehabilitation of  structures  on each  unit   lot  is subject to review and approval of plans that are consistent with the design of the surrounding  structures  on the parent  lot  as approved by the  city  through subject file number as stated in subsection  (D)(7)(a)  of this section.

      8.   Effect of Preliminary Approval.   Preliminary approval constitutes authorization for the  applicant  to  develop  the required facilities and improvements, upon review and approval of construction drawings by the Public Works  Department . All  development  must be subject to any conditions imposed by the  city  on the preliminary approval.

      9.   Revision and Expiration.    Unit lot subdivisions  follow the revision and expiration procedures established in AMC Chapter  19.28 , Permit Revision and Expiration.

   E.   Binding Site Plans.

      1.    Division of land  using the  binding site plan  process is limited to:

        a.   Divisions for sale or lease of property in  mixed-use  or industrial zones.

        b.   Divisions for the purpose of lease when no residential  structures  other than  manufactured homes  or travel trailers are permitted to be placed on the land.

        c.   Divisions of land into  lots  or  tracts  made under the provisions of the Horizontal Properties Regimes Act (Chapter  64.32  RCW) or the Condominium Act (Chapter  64.34  RCW).

      2.   Approval Process.    Binding site plans  follow the procedures established in AMC  19.20.030 .

      3.   Post-Approval Requirements.   The following requirements apply to proposals submitted under this section:

        a.   All provisions, conditions, and requirements of the  binding site plan  are legally enforceable on the purchaser or any  person  acquiring a lease or other ownership interest of any  lot , parcel, or  tract  created pursuant to the  binding site plan . A sale, transfer, or lease of any  lot ,  tract , or parcel that does not conform to the requirements of the  binding site plan  approval will be considered a violation of this chapter.

        b.   All  development  must be in conformity with the approved  binding site plan  and any existing or subsequent applicable permit approval. Each  binding site plan  document must reference the requirement for compliance with any existing or subsequent permit approval.

        c.   Revision and Expiration.    Binding site plans  must follow the revision and expiration procedures established in AMC Chapter  19.28 , Permit Revision and Expiration.

        d.   Approved  binding site plans  may contain any easements, restrictions, covenants, or conditions as would a  subdivision  approved by the  city .

      4.   Recording.   All  final plats  must be recorded in compliance with the following:

        a.   Fees and Performance Assurance.   Prior to recording, the  applicant  must submit the original  final plat  drawings together with the  plat  checking fees. Unless all required improvements have been constructed prior to  final plat  approval, the  applicant  must also submit all required performance assurances to guarantee completion of the improvements as required by AMC  19.51.070 .

        b.   Recording Required.   No  final plat  may be recorded unless approved as provided in this section. The original of an approved  final plat  must be filed for record with the Skagit County Auditor.

        c.   Time Limit.   All  final plats  must be recorded within 60  days  after final approval is granted by the  city . Approval must expire if the  final plat  is not recorded within this period.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.32.060   Final plat application requirements.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Applications for  final plat  approval will be accepted only when all of the following conditions have been satisfied:

      1.   All plans, specifications, as-built drawings, and documents relating to required public improvements have been approved and accepted by the  City  Engineer.

      2.   All deeds, conveyances, covenants, dedications, indemnities, restrictions, and agreements have been approved by the  City  Attorney.

      3.   All fees are paid and accepted, all voluntary contributions are accepted and approved, and all security devices are approved and effective.

      4.   All improvements and other conditions required by the  preliminary plat  approval have been installed and approved, or have been bonded in accordance with this title.

      5.   All sewage disposal, water supply,  stormwater  and other utility systems are functioning properly and are determined to be adequate.

      6.   All required certifications by the owner, financial institutions, and surveyor are  signed .

      7.   A title report, completed within 30  days  preceding submittal of a complete  final plat , is provided showing ownership and all other interests in the land described and shown on the  final plat  are in the name of the  person   signing  the owner’s certificate.

      8.   A completed  stormwater   site plan  and a  stormwater  maintenance plan for all  stormwater  elements of the  plat .

    B.    Final plat  maps must be prepared in accordance with the following:

      1.   A land surveyor registered in the state of Washington must prepare or supervise the preparation of the  final plat , pursuant to RCW  58.04.003 , and must certify and  sign  the map.

      2.   A land surveyor registered in the state of Washington must survey the land to be divided, and as much of the sections in which the land is located as is needed to properly orient the land within the sections. The survey must comply with applicable state and  city  standards.

    C.   The following information must be included on all  final plat  maps:

      1.   The full and complete legal description of all land included in the  plat .

      2.   The name of the  plat .

      3.   Locations and names, without abbreviation, of all streets, public areas, and easements within and adjoining the  plat .

      4.   True north point on each sheet which depicts property included in the  plat .

      5.   The scale, uniform and of sufficient size for good legibility, on each sheet which depicts property included in the  plat .

      6.   The length and bearings of all straight lines, radii, arcs and semi-tangents of all curves.

      7.   Centerline data on streets and easements, including bearings and distances.

      8.   All dimensions along the lines of each  lot  and  tract , in feet and decimals of a foot to the nearest hundredth, with the true bearings and any other data necessary for the location of any boundary line in the field.

      9.   Centerline data, width and sidelines of all easements, restrictions, and  rights-of-way  to which  lots  and  tracts  are subject.

      10.   Easements for storm drains, sewers, utilities and all other purposes must be denoted by broken lines.

      11.   The maximum  impervious surface  allowed for each  lot  as determined by the calculations in the  stormwater  report for the  subdivision .

      12.   Provisions approved by the  City  Attorney, ensuring access to storm drainage facilities and  public access  to trails or sidewalks if required as a condition of  preliminary plat  approval.

      13.   Contiguous  plats  by name or, if unplatted, so noted.

      14.    City  and county boundaries crossing or adjoining the  subdivision .

      15.   All  lots  must be numbered in sequence and provided with an address as provided by the  city ’s address coordinator.

      16.   Each  lot  must be shown entirely on one sheet.

      17.   All points which were used as ties to establish the boundaries of the  tract .

      18.   The location, size and shape of all permanent control monuments found and established at the controlling corners on the perimeter and within the  plat  and all monuments or other evidence used as ties to establish the  plat  boundaries.

      19.   Accurate boundaries of all areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use or to be committed for the common use of property owners within the  subdivision . All dedications and reservations must be stated on the  plat  together with appropriate recording references as required by the  Director .

      20.   All required dedications, endorsements, covenants, affidavits, and certificates must be stated and shown on the face of the  plat .

      21.   The section, township and range.

      22.   Conditions of approval of the  preliminary plat , including but not limited to dedications, reservations,  open space   tracts , critical areas and buffers,  LID  features,  stormwater  requirements and homeowners’ association obligations.

      23.   Homeowners’ association documents, condominium declarations, and other similar documents required or permitted by the  preliminary plat .

      24.   Names and addresses of subdivider(s) and surveyor(s) on each sheet.

      25.   The number of the sheet and total number of sheets on each sheet.

      26.   Other information the  Director  deems necessary.

    D.   Certificates.   The following certificates must be shown on the  final plat  map. Certifications by the owner, financial institutions and surveyor must be  signed  before the  final plat  is submitted for  city  signatures.

      1.   Surveyor.   The surveyor’s seal and signature on the  plat  along with a statement certifying that:

        a.   The  plat  was prepared by the surveyor or under their supervision;

        b.   The  plat  is a true and correct representation of the land and has been thoroughly surveyed as required by this chapter;

        c.   The legal description is a full and correct description of the land to be divided; and

        d.   Monumentation and  lot  corner stakes as required by the  City  Engineer and this chapter have been or will be set.

      2.   Owner.   The owner of any interest in and the holder of any lien or encumbrance upon the land proposed for  subdivision  must certify that the proposed  final plat  is submitted with their consent and there is no objection thereto.

      3.   Dedications.   A statement and certificate of dedication by the owner, acknowledged by a notary and acceptable to the  City  Attorney, for all areas to be dedicated to or for the benefit of the public. This includes dedication of  city   stormwater facilities  and access easements when required by AMC Chapter  19.76 ,  Stormwater .

      4.   Owner’s Covenant.   The owner must grant to the  city  a covenant acceptable to the  city  and releasing, indemnifying and holding the  city  harmless from any and all claims for damages, liabilities, or injunctive relief of whatever nature arising from the design, construction, operation and maintenance of the  plat  and all associated improvements.

      5.   Waiver of Access.   If required by the conditions of  preliminary plat  approval, a waiver by the owner of direct access to any street from any property.

      6.   Roads Not Dedicated.   A statement by the owner and clear visual indication on the  plat  of every street, way, road, sidewalk or similar facility that is not dedicated to the public, and specifying the maintenance and inspection responsibility therefor.

      7.   City Engineer.   A statement to be  signed  by the  City  Engineer accepting the survey data, dedications and reservations, the layout of streets and other  rights-of-way , design of bridges, sewage and water systems, all other utilities, and all other public improvements.

      8.   Director.   A statement to be  signed  by the  Director  that the  final plat  conforms to the approved  preliminary plat  and all conditions of the preliminary approval.

      9.   County Treasurer.   A statement to be  signed  by the county treasurer that all taxes and assessments for which the land to be divided may be liable as of the date of the  signing  of the statement have been paid in full.

      10.   City Treasurer.   A statement to be  signed  by the  City  Treasurer that all assessments, fees and contributions have been paid in full or secured in accordance with this title.

      11.   Council Approval.   For  long subdivision   final plats  only, a statement that the  City Council  has approved the  final plat , to be  signed  by the Mayor and  City  Clerk following final action of the  City Council .

    E.   The surveyor must set monuments at street intersections,  lot  and  block  corners, boundary angle points, points in curves in streets, points of tangents in streets, points of intersection in streets, controlling corners on the boundaries of land and at other points as required by the  City  Engineer. The type of monument and method of setting will be specified by the  City  Engineer.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.32.070   Review criteria for approval of final subdivisions.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

 No final  subdivision  may be approved unless the final  subdivision :

    A.   Substantially conforms to all terms, conditions, and provisions of preliminary approval.

    B.   Contains a dedication to the public of all common improvements including but not limited to streets, roads, sewage disposal systems, storm drainage systems, and water supply systems which were a condition of approval. The intention to dedicate is evidenced by the owner’s presentment of the  final plat  showing the dedication, and the acceptance by the  city  is evidenced by the approval of the  final plat .

    C.   Meets the requirements of this chapter, applicable state laws, and all other local ordinances adopted by the  city  which were in effect at the time a complete application for the  preliminary plat  approval was filed.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.32.080   Subdivision alteration and vacation.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

 Requests for  subdivision   alterations  or  subdivision  vacations are reviewed and processed according to the procedures and criteria outlined in RCW    58.17.212  through  58.17.218   .  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.32.090   Violations—Penalty.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under AMC Title  20  for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

    B.   This chapter must not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any  person  owning any land or  building , or constructing or modifying any  subdivisions  in the  city  for damages to anyone injured or damaged either in  person  or property by any defect therein; nor may the  city  or any agent thereof be held as assuming such liability by reason of preliminary or final approval or by issuance of any permits or certificates authorized herein.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

	Your Selections

	 What’s Nearby

			 Title

					   18

					 19

					 20

			 Division

					   2

					 3

					 4

			 Chapter

					   19.30

					 19.32

					 19.34

		On This Page

				19.32.010 Purpose

				19.32.020 Applicability

				19.32.030 Preliminary land division approval—Application requirements

				19.32.040 Preliminary land division approval—Criteria for decision

				19.32.050 Procedures for review—Specific land division types

				19.32.060 Final plat application requirements

				19.32.070 Review criteria for approval of final subdivisions

				19.32.080 Subdivision alteration and vacation

				19.32.090 Violations—Penalty

  The Anacortes Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 5028, passed May 4, 2026.

 Disclaimer: The city attorney’s office has the official version of the Anacortes Municipal Code. Users should contact the city attorney’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited here.

				 City Website: www.anacorteswa.gov
				 City Telephone: (360) 293-1900

	  Hosted by General Code.

			 Privacy Policy
			|
			 Terms of Use
			|
			 Cookie Preferences

				 Contents

					 ×

					 All Publications

					Municipal Code

					Municipal Policies

			   Your Selections

					Anacortes Municipal Code

					Anacortes Municipal Policies

		   Expand All

		   Collapse All

		   Share

		   Clear

					   Close

		 View Full Table

		 View Full Image

		 View Full File

		  ×

			    Go to Top

			    Go to Bottom

			    Share/Save

			 Close

				Save, Share, Bookmark or Print

				History of This Subsection