Ch. 19.44 Commercial Uses | Anacortes Municipal Code

 Skip to main content

		Loading…

	 Anacortes, WA

		Municipal Code

				   Home

					   Ch. 19.43

					   Title 19 Div. 4

					   Ch. 19.45

			 Toggle site navigation

			 Menu

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 4, Zoning and Land Uses
  Ch. 19.44, Commercial Uses

						   Home

							   Contents

						   Track

							Legislative History

								Historic Versions

								Pending Updates

								Recent Updates

						   Share

							This Page

							Your Selections

						   Settings

						   Help

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 4, Zoning and Land Uses
  Ch. 19.44, Commercial Uses

	    Chapter 19.44   COMMERCIAL USES   Revised

			 Search Within This

	   This chapter is included in your selections.

 Sections:

   19.44.010   Day care.

   19.44.020   General-service.  Revised

   19.44.030   Medical.

   19.44.040   Office.

   19.44.050   Overnight lodging.

   19.44.060   Parking.

   19.44.070   Passenger terminal.

   19.44.080   Personal service.

   19.44.090   Recreation, indoor.  Revised

   19.44.100   Recreation, outdoor.

   19.44.110   Restaurant/bar.

   19.44.120   Retail sales.  Revised

   19.44.130   Vehicle and boat sales/rental.  Revised

    19.44.010   Day care.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Day Care Use Category.   A facility providing care, protection and supervision of children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence. Care is typically provided to a given individual for fewer than 18 hours each  day , although the facility may be open 24 hours each  day .  Day care  includes the following uses:

      1.    Day care  I facilities.

      2.    Day care  II facilities.

    B.   Definition.   An establishment for group care of nonresident adults or children. Specifically:

      1.    Day care  includes child  day care  services, adult  day care  centers, and all of the following:

        a.   Adult  day care , such as adult  day  health centers or social  day care  as defined by the Washington State  Department  of Social and Health Services.

        b.    Nursery   schools  for children under minimum age for education in public  schools .

        c.   Privately conducted kindergartens or pre-kindergartens when not a part of a public or parochial  school .

        d.   Programs covering before- and after- school  care for  school  children.

      2.    Day care  establishments are subclassified as follows:

        a.    Day care  I—a maximum of 12 adults or children in any 24-hour period, based within a residential  dwelling , and as provided for in RCW  35A.63.215 .

        b.    Day care  II—over 12 adults or children in any 24-hour period or  day care  as a  principal use .

      3.    Day care  II in the R4 use zone must meet the following criteria:

        a.   An approved passenger drop-off and pick-up area must be provided adjacent to the site.

        b.   Parking must be provided in an amount equal to the number of staff on the largest hourly shift.

        c.   The facility must meet any applicable Washington State  Department  of Children, Youth, and  Families  (DCYF) licensing requirements including interior floor space,  fencing  and outdoor  open space  area.  (Ord. 4028 § 2 (Att. A), 2022; Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.020   General-service.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

			This section was recently amended by Ordinance 5028, codified in May 2026.

    A.   General-Service Use Category.   Includes a category of uses whose primary activity is the provision of service, rental, and/or repair to boats, vehicles, appliances, tools, electronic equipment, machinery, and other similar products for personal, commercial, or civic use. General service uses involving exterior activities that meet the definition of heavy service (see subsection  (C)  below), are classified as heavy service uses for purposes of determining whether the use is permitted in a particular zone.

 Specific uses in this category include, but are not limited to:

      1.   Postal and courier services, post office.

      2.   Small boat repair.

      3.   Appliance repair.

      4.   Equipment rentals.

      5.   Electronic or equipment service.

      6.   Vehicle repair.

      7.     Municipal service facility .

      8.     Public safety facility .

      9.   Car wash.

      10.   Heavy service.

   B.   Standards for General-Service Uses with Drive-Through Facilities.

      1.   Drive-through facilities are prohibited in the CBD zone.

      2.   Drive-through facilities are subject to the site design standards in AMC  19.62.060(D) .

   C.   Heavy Service.

      1.   Definition.   General-service uses that have any exterior service activities or feature exterior storage areas that total greater than 15,000 gross square feet or occupy an area larger than the size of the use’s principal  building .

   D.   Municipal Service Facility.

      1.   Definition.   An occupied facility supporting the external and internal operations provided by municipal government, including but not limited to maintenance of water, sewer,  stormwater , roads, parks, vehicles, and facilities.

   E.   Public Safety Facility.

      1.   Definition.   A facility for the provision of fire and rescue, medical, police, and emergency response services by a governmental entity.

   F.   Small Boat Repair.

      1.   Definition.   Repair of small boats which are capable of being transported on public roadways as a standard load without a special permit, typically not exceeding 40 feet in overall length, 8.5 feet in width, and 14 feet in height. Repair of boats exceeding these dimensions is classified as a Water-Oriented Industrial Use (AMC  19.45.080 ).

   G.   Vehicle Repair.

      1.   Definition.   A service use engaged in the diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of motor vehicles. Vehicle repair uses that meet the heavy service definition in subsection  (C)  of this section are only permitted in zones where heavy service is permitted.

        a.   “Minor vehicle repair” means a service use primarily engaged in routine maintenance and light mechanical work on motor vehicles. Typical activities include part replacement, diagnostics, fluid service, tire and battery work, and similar minor repairs performed within an enclosed building. The use typically serves light-duty vehicles, though occasional service of medium-duty vehicles may occur. The use does not include repair activities defined under major vehicle repair and does not include prolonged outdoor storage of vehicles awaiting service.

        b.   “Major vehicle repair” means a service use primarily engaged in extensive mechanical, structural, or body-related repair or reconditioning of motor vehicles. Typical activities include engine or transmission repair or replacement, drivetrain work, collision and body repair, frame straightening, painting, dismantling, or other heavy duty repair services. Major repair may serve light-, medium-, or heavy-duty vehicles. Minor repairs are only allowed when part of a major repair.

     2.   Zone Specific Standards.

        a.   In the industrial zone, minor vehicle repair uses primarily engaged in rapid, routine services such as fluid service, lubrication, filter replacement, tire repair and replacement, or other short-duration maintenance with high customer turnover, are prohibited.  (Ord. 5028 § 2 (Att. A), 2026; Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.030   Medical.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Medical Use Category.   A facility providing medical or surgical care to patients. Some facilities may offer overnight care. This category includes, but is not limited to:

      1.   Blood plasma donation center.

      2.   Medical or dental laboratory.

      3.    Hospital , urgent care, or emergency  medical office .

      4.    Medical office  for dentist, chiropractor, osteopath, physician, or other medical practitioner.

      5.   Medical clinic.

      6.   Medical  day care .

    B.   R3, R3A, R4, and R4A Zone Standards.   No new medical uses are allowed in the R3, R3A, R4, and R4A zones. Expansion of a neighborhood medical or dental office may only occur if such office was in existence and in operation as of the  effective date  of these regulations.

   C.   Hospital.

      1.   Definition.   A  building  designed and used for medical and surgical diagnosis, treatment, and housing of  persons  under the care of doctors and nurses. Rest homes,  nursing homes , convalescent homes, and clinics are not included.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.040   Office.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Office Use Category.   Activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, professional, or financial services. Office includes, but is not limited to:

      1.   Business services including, but not limited to,  advertising , business management consulting, data processing, or collection agency.

      2.   Professional services including, but not limited to, lawyer, accountant, bookkeeper, engineer, architect, counseling, sales office, or travel agency.

      3.   Financial services including, but not limited to, lender, investment or brokerage house, bank, call center, bail bonds, insurance adjuster, real estate or insurance agent, or mortgage agent.

      4.   Charitable institution (not providing housing or shelter).

      5.    City , county, state, or federal government office.

      6.   Radio, TV or recording studio, or utility office.

      7.   Trade, vocational, or business  school .

    B.   CM2, LM1, and I Zone Standards.   In the CM2, LM1, and I zones office uses must be limited to no more than 50 percent of the ground level of the  building . Exception: This subsection does not apply for office uses which are accessory to another  permitted use .  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.050   Overnight lodging.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Overnight Lodging Category.   Accommodations arranged for short-term stays (less than 30  days ). Overnight lodging includes, but is not limited to:

      1.   Bed and breakfast.

      2.    Hotel / motel .

      3.   Short-term rentals.

      4.   Youth hostel.

   B.   Bed and Breakfast.

      1.   Definition.   A single- family  residential  unit  which provides transient lodging, for compensation, by renting up to six sleeping room accommodations.

      2.   Purpose.   This section is intended to ensure parking, impact on surrounding neighbors, health and safety, and other considerations limit any  adverse impacts  of bed and breakfasts on the surrounding neighborhood.

     3.   Requirements.

        a.   The owner must be the operator of the facility and must reside on the premises.

        b.   The owner’s quarters and guest rooms must all be in the main  building .

        c.   If located in a residential zone, the facility must be operated in such a manner as not to give the outward appearance of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term.

        d.   The use must provide off-street parking, including parking for the primary residence per AMC Chapter  19.64  in addition to one  parking space  per guest room.

   C.   Hotel/Motel.

      1.   Definition.   A  building  or portion thereof designed or used for short-term rental of  units  for sleeping purposes, with or without cooking facilities, and which may include related  accessory uses  such as shared dining facilities, recreation facilities, and meeting facilities.

   D.   Short-Term Rental.

      1.   Definition.   “Short-term rental” means an overnight lodging use, that is not a  hotel  or  motel , or a bed and breakfast, in which a  dwelling unit , or portion thereof, is offered or provided to a guest for a fee for fewer than 30 consecutive nights.

     2.   C, CBD, MMU and CM Zone Standards.

        a.   Short-term rentals in the C, CBD, MMU and CM zones that were lawfully established and obtained a  city  business license prior to the date of adoption of Ordinance  4046      (March 27, 2023) may continue to operate so long as the short-term rental maintains a current  city  business license and complies with all applicable local and state regulations.

   E.   Youth Hostel.

      1.   Definition.   Relatively affordable overnight lodging with shared dormitory-style facilities.  (Ord. 4075 § 2 (Att. A), 2024; Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.060   Parking.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Parking Use Category.   Facilities that provide parking as a  principal use .

   B.    Principal Use Parking Standards in Residential Zones.

      1.   In the R1, R2, R2A, R3, R3A, R4A, and OT zones, parking as a  principal use  is restricted to  public parking  supporting a public facility such as a library, park, or trail.

      2.   In the R4 zone, parking as a  principal use  is restricted to  lots  abutting the C zone and supporting a  mixed-use   development  in the C zone.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.070   Passenger terminal.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Passenger Terminal Use Category.   Facilities for the takeoff and landing of planes and helicopters, and facilities for trains, boats, buses, taxis or limo services. Passenger terminal includes, but is not limited to:

      1.   Airport.

      2.   Airfield, landing strip.

      3.   Bus passenger terminal, multimodal facility.

      4.   Heliport.

      5.   Railroad station.

      6.   Taxi dispatch center, limousine service.

      7.   Ferry terminal, passenger boat terminal.

   B.   Aeronautical Use.

      1.   Definition.   See AMC  19.41.080 .  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.080   Personal service.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Personal Service Use Category.   Facilities involved in providing  personal services  to the general public.  Personal service  includes the following uses:

      1.   Animal care.

      2.   Beauty/hair salon.

      3.   Catering establishment.

      4.   Cleaning establishment, dry-cleaning or laundry drop-off facility, laundromat, washeteria.

      5.   Copy center.

      6.   Funeral home, funeral parlor, mortuary, undertaking establishment, crematorium, pet crematorium.

      7.   Optometrist.

      8.   Palmist, psychic, medium, fortune telling.

      9.   Tailor, milliner, upholsterer.

      10.   Tattoo parlor, body piercing.

      11.   Wedding chapel.

   B.   Animal Care—Indoor.

      1.   Definition.   Any  building  or land used, designed, or arranged for the care of animals without outdoor activity. Includes animal grooming, animal  hospital , veterinary clinic, pet clinic, animal boarding, animal shelter, cattery,  kennel , and animal  day care .

      2.   Use Standards.   No outdoor activity associated with the care of animals is allowed. Also see AMC  6.06.090 , Commercial  kennels , catteries, pet shops and animal shelters—General conditions, for applicable standards.

   C.   Animal Care—Outdoor.

      1.   Definition.   Any  building  or land used, designed or arranged for the care of animals that includes outdoor activity. Includes animal grooming, animal  hospital , veterinary clinic, pet clinic, animal boarding, animal shelter, cattery,  kennel , and animal  day care .

     2.   Use Standards.

        a.   Any  structure  which houses animals which is not fully enclosed and all animal runs must be located at least 100 feet from any  lot  line and 300 linear feet from any preexisting principal residential  structure  located on another  lot .

        b.   All pens and  kennels  used for housing animals (excluding horses, ponies, and cows) must be surrounded by a black, dark green, or dark brown vinyl-coated chain-link  fence  not less than six feet in height, and enclosed on top, or be located in an enclosed  structure .

   D.   Beauty Salons.

      1.   Definition.   Any establishment where cosmetology services are provided, including hair care, nail care, and skin care.

   E.   Funeral Home.

      1.   Definition.   An establishment providing services such as preparing the human dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals, and may include limited caretaker facilities. This classification excludes cemeteries, crematoriums, and columbariums.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.090   Recreation, indoor.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

			This section was recently amended by Ordinance 5014, codified in February 2026.

    A.   Recreation, Indoor Use Category.   Commercial uses, varying in size, providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities in an indoor setting. The permissions for indoor recreation uses in Table 19.41.050 are based on size ( net floor area ), with  conditional use  thresholds of 10,000 square feet and 20,000 square feet in some zones. The indoor recreation category includes, but is not limited to:

      1.    Adult concessions .

      2.   Amusement center, game arcade, children’s amusement center.

      3.   Arena.

      4.   Billiard hall, pool hall.

      5.   Bingo parlor.

      6.   Bowling alley.

      7.   Convention center or conference center.

      8.   Dance, martial arts, music studio, classroom.

      9.   Health club.

      10.   Shooting range.

      11.   Sports academy.

      12.   Miniature golf facility.

      13.   Movie theater or other indoor theater.

      14.   Skating rink or roller rink.

      15.   Swimming pool.

      16.   Extreme sports facility.

   B.   Zone-Specific Standards.

      1.   LM1 and I Zones.   Limited indoor recreation facilities, including but not limited to fitness centers, gyms, climbing gyms, martial arts studies, and indoor sports courts (e.g., basketball, volleyball), may be permitted when the  Director  finds that following criteria are met:

        a.   Recreational uses must be designed to minimize conflicts with adjacent industrial operations, including noise, truck access, and hours of operation.

        b.   The maximum occupancy for such facilities does not exceed 30  people , unless the  applicant  demonstrates that a larger occupancy will neither disrupt surrounding industrial operations nor significantly reduce the land available for industrial uses.

    C.   Special Indoor Recreation Uses.   The following uses fall under the “recreation, indoor” use category, but due to their unique attributes come with their own use permissions and standards. These uses are not subject to the  net floor area  parameters under the civic use permissions in Tables 19.42.020 and 19.42.030.

     1.   Adult Concessions.

        a.   Adult entertainment and  retail , taken together as “concessions,” and defined in AMC  5.35.030 , are recognized as being uses that may prove detrimental in certain circumstances to its surrounding neighborhoods and thereby requiring the following regulations.

       b.   Zone-Specific Requirements .

          i.   In the C zone, adult  retail  is only permitted south of 22nd Street.

          ii.   In the LM1 zone,  adult concessions  are only permitted between Christiansen Road and Reservation Road.

          iii.   In the HM zone, adult entertainment is only permitted north of South March Point Road and east of Reservation Road.

        c.   No  adult concession  may be located within the specified distance of the following uses:

          i.   One hundred feet of any public or private  school , or any trade or vocational  school , that on a regular basis has at least one student under the age of 18 years.

          ii.   One hundred feet of any  religious institution .

          iii.   One hundred feet of any park or any public facility or P zone.

          iv.   Three hundred feet of another  adult concession .

          v.   For adult entertainment, 100 feet of any residential zone.

          vi.   For adult  retail , 30 feet of any residential zone.

        d.   The distance provided herein must be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening  buildings , from the nearest point on the property line or the zone boundary to the specified concession.

        e.   No  person  owning, operating or managing an  adult concession  or their employee or agent may invite, allow, or permit any  person  under the age of 18 years to enter or remain on the premises of any concession.

        f.   On the exterior of any concession there must be no window, marquee, or other display of any manner describing, identifying, depicting or portraying “specified anatomical areas,” or “specified sexual activities” (see AMC  5.35.030 , Definitions).

        g.   Violation of the use provisions of this section is declared to be a public nuisance per se, which must be abated by a civil action only and not by criminal prosecution.

        h.   Concession establishments may be identified with  signs  on the exterior of the establishment in accordance with AMC Chapter  19.67 ,  Signs . All  signs  must comply with subsection  (C)(1)(f)  of this section. No  advertising , text, pictures or depictions may be permitted anywhere in the windows, on the site, sidewalk or street ( A-board   signs ),  storefront , marquee, or anywhere else other than on the approved signage. Terms such as “sale,” etc., and other such  advertising , as associated with mainstream  advertising , may be accepted, subject to the interpretation of the Planning  Director  or her/his designee.

        i.   There must be no more than one concession business operating in the same  building ,  structure  or portion thereof.

        j.   Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business,  building  or use which violates any ordinance or statute of the  city  of Anacortes, Skagit County, state of Washington, or the  United  States.

        k.   Parking Requirements.   For  adult concession  facilities constructed after the  effective date  of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all parking must be visible from the public  right-of-way . For adult entertainment facilities located in  buildings  constructed prior to the  effective date  of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all parking should be visible from the public  right-of-way . In cases of  adult concession  facilities located in  buildings  constructed prior to the  effective date  of the ordinance codified in this chapter where this is not feasible, access to the parking must be in as direct a route as possible from the public  right-of-way  and the parking area must remain free and clear of visual obstructions at all times. Access to the exterior rear of the  building  must be denied to any  persons  other than employees and public officials during the performance of their respective duties and tasks by means of a  fence ,  wall  or other device approved by the  city .

       l.   Lighting Requirements.

          i.   All on-site parking areas and premises entries of  adult concession  facilities must be illuminated from dusk until one hour past closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or pathways.

          ii.   All permitted on-site lighting, including  signs , must be shaded and directed so as not to be visible from any residentially zoned property.

          iii.   An on-premises exterior lighting plan must be presented to the  city  for approval prior to the operation of any  adult concession .

        m.   Where lighted  signs  and illuminated areas are permitted, such illuminating devices must be shaded and directed so as not to be visible from any residentially zoned property.

     2.   Shooting Range, Indoor.

        a.   Definition.   An indoor facility designed and improved to encompass shooting stations or firing lines, target areas, and/or other related components.  (Ord. 5014 § 2 (Att. A), 2025; Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.100   Recreation, outdoor.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Outdoor Recreation Use Category.   Commercial uses, varying in size, providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities. Activities take place predominately outdoors or within outdoor  structures . Outdoor recreation category includes, but is not limited to:

      1.    Drive-in  theater.

      2.   Camp, campground, travel trailer park,  recreational vehicle  park.

      3.   Extreme sports facility such as paintball, BMX, or skateboarding.

      4.   Golf course.

      5.   Outdoor commercial activity such as batting cage, golf driving range, amusement park, miniature golf facility, water park.

      6.   Outdoor theater.

      7.   Outdoor sports or entertainment facility.

      8.   Riding stable.

      9.   Shooting range.

      10.   Racetrack.

      11.   Sports academy for active recreational or competitive sports.

      12.   Stadium, arena.

    B.   Outdoor Recreation Use Standards.   A facility designed to accommodate 200 or more patrons at one time may only be allowed through securing a  conditional use  permit.

   C.   Campground.

      1.   Definition.   An area to be used for transient occupancy by camping in tents, camp trailers, travel trailers, motor homes, or similar movable or temporary sleeping quarters of any kind.

   D.   Golf Course.

      1.   Definition.   A facility providing a private or public golf recreation area designed for executive or regulation play along with accessory golf support facilities, but excluding miniature golf.

   E.   Marinas and Boat Moorage.

      1.   Definition.   A use of land involved in the operation of a marina, including  structures  and activities normally integral to the operation of a marina, such as servicing, fueling, pumping-out, and chartering. Marinas may include accessory  retail  and equipment storage uses that directly support water-dependent activities per the Shoreline Master Program.

   F.   Recreational Vehicle Park (RV Park).

      1.   Definition.   Land containing two or more campsites which are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by  people  in recreation vehicles or travel trailers which are used for recreation or vacation purposes.

      2.   Minimum Standards.    Recreational vehicle  parks must meet the minimum standards of the Washington  Department  of Social and Health Services and the county health  department .

      3.   Streets and Recreational Vehicle Spaces.   The arrangement, type, extent, width,  grade , and location of all streets and sidewalks must be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, and public convenience and safety, and in their relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The RV park must make appropriate provisions for:

        a.    Open spaces  and  landscaping .

        b.   Drainage ways.

        c.   Streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways.

        d.   Water service.

        e.   Sanitary waste disposal.

        f.   Parks and playgrounds.

        g.   Other utilities.

 All  recreational vehicle  spaces must be provided with safe and convenient access from abutting streets or roads. Alignment and gradients of roads must be adapted to topography. Surfaces of roads must be smooth, hard, dense and well drained.

 Exposed or disturbed ground surfaces in all parts of every  recreational vehicle  space must be covered with gravel or other material, or protected with a vegetative cover, to minimize erosion.

     4.   Internal Design.

        a.    Recreational vehicle  spaces must be arranged to facilitate placement and removal of vehicles from individual spaces.

        b.   Accessory facilities must be designed and located for safe and convenient use by occupants of the park, but so as to inhibit their use by nonoccupants.

        c.    Recreational vehicle  spaces must be separated from each other and from other  structures  to allow at least 10 feet of separation between parked vehicles and  structures .

        d.   The density must not exceed 20  recreational vehicle  spaces per acre of gross  site area .

        e.   All  recreational vehicle  spaces should be located at least 25 feet from a  public street  or highway  right-of-way  and must be set back 10 feet from interior roadways.

        f.   The  Director  may require that  recreational vehicle  parks located adjacent to industrial or commercial land uses provide screening such as  fences  or natural growth along the property boundary lines separating the park from such uses.

        g.   At least one-twelfth of the area of the  recreational vehicle  park must be developed for a park,  open space , or playground area for use of the RV park occupants. The area must be located so as to conveniently serve all patrons of the  recreational vehicle  park. Recreation areas may include space for recreation  buildings  and common facilities such as a laundry.

      5.   Water Supply.   The  City  Engineer must require that any water supply system which is installed be designed to provide an adequate accessible water supply for fire protection purposes. The water supply system must meet standards published by the Insurance Services Office: Guide for Determination of Required Fire-Flow.

      6.   Sewage Disposal.   All sewage disposal systems must meet the minimum standards of the Washington State  Department  of Social and Health Services, the Washington State  Department  of Ecology, and the county health  department . The means for sewage disposal must be subject to approval by the  City  Engineer.

      7.   Solid Waste.   The  recreational vehicle  park developer must assure that provisions for collection and disposal of solid waste are available. The means for solid waste collection and disposal must be subject to approval by the  City  Engineer.

      8.   Required Facilities.   All  recreational vehicle  parks having more than eight spaces must have approved facilities for laundry, showers, and restrooms for users of the park.

      9.   Retail Sales.   No  retail  sales uses are allowed within the park unless a specific site for such use, intended to primarily serve park users, is approved by the  City Council  as part of the  conditional use  permit.

      10.   Ownership.   In all cases the entire area of an RV park must be maintained in single ownership.

   G.   Shooting Range, Outdoor.

      1.   Definition.   An outdoor facility designed and improved to encompass shooting stations or firing lines, target areas, berms and baffles, and/or other related components.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.110   Restaurant/bar.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Restaurant/Bar Use Category.   A facility that prepares and sells food and drink for on- or off-premises consumption. The restaurant/bar category includes, but is not limited to:

      1.   Bar, nightclub, tavern, lounge.

      2.   Eating establishment.

      3.   Food truck.

   B.   Standards for Restaurants with Drive-Through Facilities.

      1.   Drive-through facilities are prohibited in the CBD zone except when such facilities are completely enclosed within a  building .

      2.   Drive-through facilities are subject to the site design standards in AMC  19.62.060(D) .

   C.   Food Truck.

      1.   Definition.   A large wheeled vehicle from which food is sold that typically contains cooking facilities where the food is prepared.

     2.   Standards.

        a.   During business operations, food trucks must be located on private property (not in the public  right-of-way ).

        b.   Food trucks may not install any seating permanently attached to the ground.

        c.   Food trucks must provide adequately sized and located waste collection containers during business operations.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.120   Retail sales.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

			This section was recently amended by Ordinance 5014, codified in February 2026.

    A.   Retail Sales Use Category.   Facilities involved in the sale, lease, or rental of new or used products. The permissions for  retail  sales uses in Table 19.41.050 are based on size ( net floor area ) per individual use, with thresholds of 5,000, 25,000, and 50,000 square feet.  Retail  sales include, but are not limited to:

      1.   Facilities involving the sale, lease, or rental of new or used products, including but not limited to appliances, art supplies, baked goods, bicycles, books,  building  supplies, cameras, carpet and floor coverings, crafts, clothing, computers, convenience goods, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, flowers, furniture, garden supplies, gifts or novelties, groceries, hardware, home improvement,  household  products, jewelry, medical supplies, music, musical instruments, office supplies, package shipping, pets, pet supplies, pharmaceuticals, photo finishing, picture frames, plants, printed materials, produce, seafood, souvenirs, sporting goods, stationery, tobacco, used or secondhand goods, vehicle parts and accessories, videos and related products.

      2.   Art gallery.

      3.   Check cashing, payday loan.

      4.   Pawnshop.

    B.   Standards for All Retail Sales Uses.   The maximum  gross floor area  for a  building  containing multiple tenant/use spaces is 75,000 square feet.

   C.   Standards for Retail Uses with Drive-Through Facilities.

      1.   Drive-through facilities are prohibited in the CBD zone.

      2.   Drive-through facilities are subject to the site design standards in AMC  19.62.060(D) .

    D.   Standards for Retail Sales Uses in the LM1 and HM Zones.   In the LM1 and HM zones, the primary  building  entries of  retail  uses must be located within the  lots  or portions of  lots  illustrated in Figure 19.44.120(D). These areas are generally within 1,000 feet of the State Route 20 intersections with March Point Road, Thompson Road, and Reservation Road as measured in a straight line from the  right-of-way  centerlines and exclude  lots  with waterfronts.

   Figure 19.44.120(D)
 Clarification on limits of retail sales uses in the LM1 and HM zones.

   E.   Neighborhood Grocery Store.

      1.   Definition.   A small  retail  establishment which primarily sells food, but also may sell other convenience and  household  goods and may include an area for dining such as a deli or coffee shop.

     2.   Standards.

        a.   Not to exceed 1,200 square feet of  retail  sales  net floor area  and 3,200 square feet of  gross floor area .

        b.   No such grocery uses must be allowed within one-quarter mile of an existing grocery store.

    F.   Special Retail Sales Uses.   The following uses fall under the “ retail  sales” use category, but, due to their unique attributes, come with their own use permissions and standards. These uses are not subject to the  net floor area  parameters under the  retail  sales permissions in Table 19.41.050.

     1.   Heavy Retail.

        a.   Definition.    Retail  uses with exterior sales and/or storage areas greater than 15,000 gross square feet or occupying a greater area than the use’s principal  building . Examples include truck stops, agricultural supplies, plant and  landscape  design materials,  building  materials, and heating fuels.

     2.   Marijuana Retailers.

        a.   Definition.   “ Marijuana  retailer” means a  person  licensed by the State Liquor and  Cannabis  Board to sell  marijuana  concentrates, useable  marijuana , and  marijuana -infused products in a  retail  outlet.

        b.   Standards.    Marijuana  retailers are only allowed east of the interchange of State Route 20 and State Route 20 Spur.

     3.   Gas Station.

        a.   Definition.   A  retail  use primarily involving automobile fuels. “Gas stations” includes specialized  structures  for selling fuel and fuel storage tanks, often underground. These establishments may provide incidental services such as automobile maintenance/repair, car washing, and the sale of food and other convenience items (including  drive-through restaurants ).

    G.   In the MS zone, up to 6,000 square feet  NFA  is permitted outright (P) on the  ground floor  abutting Commercial Avenue south of 2nd Street.  (Ord. 5014 § 2 (Att. A), 2025; Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.44.130   Vehicle and boat sales/rental.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

			This section was recently amended by Ordinance 5028, codified in May 2026.

    A.   Vehicle and Boat Sales/Rental Use Category.   This category includes, but is not limited to, direct sales, rental or leasing of consumer motor vehicles and watercraft.

   B.   Vehicle Sales/Rental.

      1.   Definition.   An establishment engaged in sales, rental, or leasing of passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks, motorcycles, or recreational vehicles.

   C.   Boat Sales/Rental.

      1.   Definition.   An establishment where boats 16 feet or more in length are rented or sold. The sale or rental of smaller boats is classified as a  retail  sales use.

     2.   Zone-Specific Standards.

        a.   In the CBD zone, boat sales are limited to small boats up to 40 feet long.  (Ord. 5028 § 2 (Att. A), 2026; Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

	Your Selections

	 What’s Nearby

			 Title

					   18

					 19

					 20

			 Division

					   3

					 4

					 5

			 Chapter

					   19.43

					 19.44

					 19.45

		On This Page

				19.44.010 Day care

				19.44.020 General-service

				19.44.030 Medical

				19.44.040 Office

				19.44.050 Overnight lodging

				19.44.060 Parking

				19.44.070 Passenger terminal

				19.44.080 Personal service

				19.44.090 Recreation, indoor

				19.44.100 Recreation, outdoor

				19.44.110 Restaurant/bar

				19.44.120 Retail sales

				19.44.130 Vehicle and boat sales/rental

  The Anacortes Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 5028, passed May 4, 2026.

 Disclaimer: The city attorney’s office has the official version of the Anacortes Municipal Code. Users should contact the city attorney’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited here.

				 City Website: www.anacorteswa.gov
				 City Telephone: (360) 293-1900

	  Hosted by General Code.

			 Privacy Policy
			|
			 Terms of Use
			|
			 Cookie Preferences

				 Contents

					 ×

					 All Publications

					Municipal Code

					Municipal Policies

			   Your Selections

					Anacortes Municipal Code

					Anacortes Municipal Policies

		   Expand All

		   Collapse All

		   Share

		   Clear

					   Close

		 View Full Table

		 View Full Image

		 View Full File

		  ×

			    Go to Top

			    Go to Bottom

			    Share/Save

			 Close

				Save, Share, Bookmark or Print

				History of This Subsection