Ch. 19.46 Public, Institutional and Open Space Uses | Anacortes Municipal Code

 Skip to main content

		Loading…

	 Anacortes, WA

		Municipal Code

				   Home

					   Ch. 19.45

					   Title 19 Div. 4

					   Ch. 19.47

			 Toggle site navigation

			 Menu

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 4, Zoning and Land Uses
  Ch. 19.46, Public, Institutional and Open Space Uses

						   Home

							   Contents

						   Track

							Legislative History

								Historic Versions

								Pending Updates

								Recent Updates

						   Share

							This Page

							Your Selections

						   Settings

						   Help

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 4, Zoning and Land Uses
  Ch. 19.46, Public, Institutional and Open Space Uses

	    Chapter 19.46   PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL AND OPEN SPACE USES

			 Search Within This

	   This chapter is included in your selections.

 Sections:

   19.46.010   Agriculture.

   19.46.020   Civic.

   19.46.030   Parks, open space, and natural areas.

   19.46.040   Utilities.

    19.46.010   Agriculture.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Uses in the agriculture category include:

 The raising and harvesting of  trees , vines, seeds, plants and crops, as well as the keeping, grazing or feeding of animals (including fish) for animal products, animal propagation, or value increase. The agriculture category includes, but is not limited to:

      1.   Animal raising including, but not limited to, horses, hogs, cows, sheep, goats, swine, poultry, rabbits and other small animals, apiculture, aquaculture, dairying, personal or commercial animal breeding and  development .

      2.   Crop production, soil preparation, agricultural services, large animal and veterinary services, farm labor and management services, research farm.

      3.   Floriculture, horticulture, pasturage, row and field crops, viticulture,  tree  or sod farm, silviculture, sale of agriculture products.

      4.   Fish hatcheries, fish farm.

      5.   Forestry, timber  tracts , forest  nursery , gathering of forest products.

      6.   Grain, fruit, field crop and vegetable cultivation and storage.

      7.   Livestock, horse, dairy, poultry and egg products.

      8.   Plant  nursery .

      9.   Restricted agriculture.

    B.   R-1 Zone Standards.   Pasture space for livestock must be provided at a minimum of 18,000 square feet per animal.

   C.   Aquaculture.

      1.   Definition.   The breeding, hatching, or raising of fish or other aquatic plants or animals for sale.

   D.   Marijuana Producers.

      1.   Definition.   “ Marijuana  producer” means a  person  licensed by the State Liquor and  Cannabis  Board to produce and sell  marijuana  at wholesale to  marijuana  processors and other  marijuana  producers.

     2.   Standards.

       a.   Nuisances.

          i.   No odor or smoke may be emitted that is detectable at or beyond the  walls  of the facility, in such a concentration or of such duration as to cause a public nuisance, or threaten health or safety, or to infringe upon the enjoyment of a neighboring use.

          ii.   The  applicant  must install an exhaust system that is designed and constructed to capture sources and contaminants to prevent spreading of contaminants or odors to other occupied parts of the  building  or surrounding area. The system must be designed by a licensed Washington State professional engineer.

        b.    Marijuana  producers are only allowed east of the interchange of State Route 20 and State Route 20 Spur.

   E.   Nursery.

      1.   Definition.   Land,  building ,  structure , or combination thereof, for the storage, cultivation, or transplanting of live  trees , shrubs, or plants, offered for sale on or off the premises including products used for gardening or  landscaping .  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.46.020   Civic.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Uses in the civic category include:

 Places of public assembly that provide ongoing public, educational and cultural services to the general public, as well as meeting areas for religious practice. Civic includes the following uses:

      1.   Cemetery.

      2.   College, community college, and university.

      3.   Community/recreation center.

      4.   Civic club.

      5.   Library.

      6.    Museum .

      7.    Religious institution .

      8.    School , public or private (K-12).

 NOTE: This category does not include:

      1.   Government offices, which fall under office use.

      2.   Trade, vocational, or business  school , which falls under office use.

      3.    Public safety facilities , which fall under general-service use.

      4.    Municipal service facilities , which fall under general-service use.

    B.   Civic Use Standards.   The permissions for civic uses in Tables 19.41.040 and 19.41.050 are based on size ( gross floor area ), with thresholds of 10,000 and 20,000 square feet, provided they meet the following standards:

      1.   Site Planning.   Civic uses are subject to site planning standards in AMC Chapter  19.62 .

      2.   Building Design.   Civic uses are subject to  building  design standards in AMC Chapter  19.63 .

  Departures  to the  building  massing standards and other applicable standards in the chapter will be considered per AMC  19.20.220 , provided alternative design treatments meet the purpose of the standards. The  Director  may exempt  buildings  not visible from the street.

      3.   Parking.   The use must comply with civic parking regulations in AMC  19.64.040  and other applicable parking regulations in AMC Chapter  19.64 , Parking, except that in no event may parking be in excess of one space per three seats in a residential zone.

      4.   A traffic mitigation plan must be submitted for approval by the  city . The plan must address traffic control, parking management (including the mitigation of overflow parking into adjoining residential areas), and traffic movement to the arterial street system. In addition to on-site parking requirements, parking in excess of the maximum may be permitted on existing off-site satellite parking  lots , subject to  city  approval of a joint use agreement. Off-site parking in residential zones must be limited to  lots  shared with existing institutional uses, such as  schools .

      5.   The storage of buses or vans over 10,000 pounds gross weight is permitted on site only if the following conditions are met:

        a.   The location of the parking areas for these vehicles is indicated on the  site plan  at the time of application.

        b.   Vehicles must be leased or owned by the owner or tenant of the site, must be in operable condition, and must have a current vehicle registration.

        c.   Vehicles must not intrude into public  right-of-way  or obstruct sight visibility from any driveway.

      6.   Landscaping.   The use must comply with  landscaping  standards in AMC Chapter  19.65 .

      7.    Fences ,  walls , and  hedges  on site must comply with AMC Chapter  19.66 .

      8.    Signs  associated with the use must comply with AMC Chapter  19.67 .

    C.   Special Civic Uses.   The following uses fall under the “civic use” category, but, due to their unique attributes, come with their own use permissions and standards unless otherwise noted. These uses are not subject to the  gross floor area  parameters under the civic use permissions in Tables 19.41.040 and 19.41.050.

     1.   Cemetery/Columbarium.

        a.   Defined.   A facility used for the permanent interment of humans or animals or their cremated remains. Includes mausoleum, columbarium, memorial, and pet cemetery.

     2.   College, Community College, or University.

        a.   Defined.   A private or public educational institution where students attend to earn an associate, baccalaureate, master’s or doctoral degree. A college/university may not be considered a trade or vocational  school  (see office use category, AMC  19.44.040 ).

       b.   Use Standards.

          i.   Any  school  that has greater than 100 students must have access onto a collector or arterial street.

          ii.   Such uses are subject to civic use standards in subsection  B  of this section.

     3.   Community Center.

        a.   Definition.   A  building  or other enclosed  structure  open to the general public that is owned and operated by a public agency, or a nonprofit organization, and that is used predominantly for cultural, educational, recreational, or social purposes. Not included in the category of community center are those businesses and occupations defined by this title as a medical use,  personal service , general-service, office,  religious institution ,  school , private club or fraternal organization.

     4.   Museums.

        a.   Definition.   A room or  building  for exhibiting, or an institution in charge of, a collection of books, or artistic, historical, or scientific objects.

     5.   Private Recreational, Civic, Social and/or Cultural Clubs.

        a.   Definition.   A range of membership-only clubs, including, but not limited to, tennis clubs, civic clubs, yacht clubs, swimming clubs, social, and/or cultural clubs. This definition excludes health clubs.

       b.   Standards.

          i.   Such uses are subject to civic use standards in subsection  B  of this section.

          ii.   In the CM2 zone, only yacht clubs are allowed.

     6.    School, Public or Private (K-12).

        a.   Definition.   An institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering regular course of instruction required by the Washington Education Code. This definition includes an elementary  school , middle or junior high  school , or high  school . If said  school  is located on the grounds of a church or house of worship, it must be considered a separate  principal use  if it has a student body in excess of 50 students. Students enrolled in a  day care  center at the church may not be separately counted as a  school .

       b.   Use Standards.

          i.   Any  school  that has greater than 100 students must have access onto a collector or arterial street.

          ii.   Pedestrian connectivity to the surrounding residential areas is required, where feasible. This includes pathways connecting to surrounding streets.

          iii.   Accessory  day cares  associated with any  school  must occupy no more than 50 percent of the  school   structure (s).

          iv.    Schools  are subject to civic use standards in subsection  B  of this section.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.46.030   Parks, open space, and natural areas.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Parks, Open Space, and Natural Areas Category.   Uses focusing on natural areas consisting mostly of passive or active outdoor recreation areas and having few  structures . The parks,  open space  and natural area category includes, but is not limited to, the following uses:

      1.   Botanical garden, nature preserve, community forest lands, recreational trails.

      2.   Game preserve, wildlife management area, refuge.

      3.   Park, including recreation field.

      4.   Reservoir, control  structure , water supply, water well.

      5.   Plazas.

   B.   Parks and Plazas.

     1.   Definitions.

        a.   Park.   Land owned by the  city  or other public entity and open to public use for purposes of pleasure, relaxation, exercise and amusement.

        b.   Plaza.   A publicly accessible  open space  usually surrounded by  buildings  and/or streets where  people  can gather. Plazas typically include walking surfaces, seating areas and some  landscaped  elements.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.46.040   Utilities.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Utilities, Major.   Large and/or regional public or private utility generation or treatment facilities and possibly having on-site personnel. This category includes, but is not limited to:

      1.   Water treatment plant.

      2.   Sanitary sewer and/or  stormwater  treatment plant.

    B.   Utilities, Minor.   Small and/or local public or private utility distribution facilities and infrastructure with no on-site personnel. This category includes, but is not limited to:

      1.   On-site  stormwater  retention, detention, or infiltration facility.

      2.   Neighborhood-serving telecommunications, gas, or electric facility.

      3.   Water and sanitary sewer pump station or lift station.

      4.   Electrical substation.

      5.   Utility service.

   C.   Sustainable Energy Generation System.

      1.   Definition.   A system that generates electricity from renewable resources such as solar energy, wind power, tidal power, geothermal energy, and biomass.

     2.   Standards.

        a.   Principal and Accessory Use Classification.   The sustainable energy generation system is a  principal use  when it generates or has the potential to generate more electricity than needed for  buildings  and facilities on the site where it is located and sends or has the potential to send excess electricity off site.

 Systems that only generate electricity for on-site use are accessory (see AMC  19.47.010  and  19.47.020  for  accessory use  and  structure  standards), unless the  Director  determines the system is a  principal use  based on system characteristics such as size, design, or off-site impacts.

 Exception: Solar energy systems attached to a rooftop and which send excess electricity off-site may be considered an  accessory use .

        b.   Location on Buildings.   Sustainable energy generation systems may be located on  building  exteriors, provided they comply with  setback  and  building height  standards for the zone in which the  building  is located and applicable design standards such as those for rooftop mechanical equipment screening (see AMC  19.62.070(E) ).

        c.   Nuisances.   Uses, processes, equipment employed, and materials stored must not inflict upon neighboring properties fumes, noise, vibrations, odor, refuse matter, water-carried waste, or other nuisances or hazards detrimental to the health, welfare, and safety of  persons  occupying or visiting the zone or adjacent zones above that which is allowed by local, state, and federal standards.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

	Your Selections

	 What’s Nearby

			 Title

					   18

					 19

					 20

			 Division

					   3

					 4

					 5

			 Chapter

					   19.45

					 19.46

					 19.47

		On This Page

				19.46.010 Agriculture

				19.46.020 Civic

				19.46.030 Parks, open space, and natural areas

				19.46.040 Utilities

  The Anacortes Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 5028, passed May 4, 2026.

 Disclaimer: The city attorney’s office has the official version of the Anacortes Municipal Code. Users should contact the city attorney’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited here.

				 City Website: www.anacorteswa.gov
				 City Telephone: (360) 293-1900

	  Hosted by General Code.

			 Privacy Policy
			|
			 Terms of Use
			|
			 Cookie Preferences

				 Contents

					 ×

					 All Publications

					Municipal Code

					Municipal Policies

			   Your Selections

					Anacortes Municipal Code

					Anacortes Municipal Policies

		   Expand All

		   Collapse All

		   Share

		   Clear

					   Close

		 View Full Table

		 View Full Image

		 View Full File

		  ×

			    Go to Top

			    Go to Bottom

			    Share/Save

			 Close

				Save, Share, Bookmark or Print

				History of This Subsection