Ch. 19.54 Subdivision Design and Block Structure | Anacortes Municipal Code

 Skip to main content

		Loading…

	 Anacortes, WA

		Municipal Code

				   Home

					   Ch. 19.53

					   Title 19 Div. 5

					   Ch. 19.59

			 Toggle site navigation

			 Menu

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 5, Community Design
  Ch. 19.54, Subdivision Design and Block Structure

						   Home

							   Contents

						   Track

							Legislative History

								Historic Versions

								Pending Updates

								Recent Updates

						   Share

							This Page

							Your Selections

						   Settings

						   Help

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 5, Community Design
  Ch. 19.54, Subdivision Design and Block Structure

	    Chapter 19.54   SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND BLOCK STRUCTURE

			 Search Within This

	   This chapter is included in your selections.

 Sections:

   19.54.010   Purpose.

   19.54.020   Block design and connectivity standards.

   19.54.030   Open space/parks.

   19.54.040   Lot design.

   19.54.050   Access, services, and utilities.

    19.54.010   Purpose.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

 The purpose of this chapter is to:

    A.   Enhance the character and livability of Anacortes’s neighborhoods.

    B.   Encourage compact and walkable neighborhoods and connections between neighborhoods.

    C.   Promote “eyes on the street” for safety.

    D.   Promote  subdivision  design that reduces energy consumption and encourages  low impact development .

    E.   Integrate  open spaces , natural elements, utilities, and recreational features into the design of  developments .  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.54.020   Block design and connectivity standards.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

 Anacortes’s  comprehensive plan  places a high priority on being a “walkable” community. In order to be walkable, there needs to be frequent accessible and attractive connections between destinations. Consequently, this requires a well-connected system of streets and pathways that encourages  people  to walk. Thus,  block  size and design have a direct impact on the walkability of a community.

   A.   All Zones.

      1.   Connectivity to Abutting Lands.   The street system of proposed  subdivisions  must be designed to connect with existing, proposed, and planned streets outside of the  subdivision . Wherever a proposed  development  abuts unplatted land or other land with the capability of being further subdivided, street stubs must be provided to allow access to future abutting  subdivisions  and to logically extend the street system into the surrounding area. All street stubs must be provided with a temporary turnaround unless specifically exempted by the Fire Marshal, and the restoration and extension of the street must be the responsibility of any future developer of the abutting land.

      2.   Continuation of Streets.   Planned streets must connect with surrounding streets to permit the convenient movement of traffic between neighborhoods and to facilitate emergency access and evacuation. Connections must be designed to meet or exceed the  block  standards in subsections  (B)  and  (C)  below, and to avoid or minimize through traffic on local streets.

      3.   Pedestrian Pathways.   Short internal pathways can improve pedestrian mobility within  developments . Examples could include a pathway in the middle of a  block  or at the end of a cul-de-sac. Such pathways must be located within an easement or common  open space   tract  allowing for  public access  and maintained by the homeowner’s association unless the  city  or other public authority accepts an offer of dedication.

    B.   Residential Zones.   New residential  developments  must provide an integrated and connected network of streets to help provide a sense of place and orientation and provide multiple travel route options for all users. A street network dominated by long, irregular loop roads and cul-de-sacs is not appropriate. The following standards apply to new  development  in the residential zones:

      1.    Blocks  must be designed to provide pedestrian and vehicular connections at intervals no greater than 660 feet.

      2.    DEPARTURES  to the standard in subsection  (B)(1)  of this section will be considered per AMC  19.20.220 , provided the alternative design meets the purposes of the standards (see AMC  19.54.010 ) and meets the following criteria:

        a.   A  departure  provides the opportunity for a public  open space  or other public amenity that goes well beyond minimum standards herein. For example, a larger  block  could allow for the  development  of a compact village of homes around a centralized  open space ; and

        b.    Departures  meeting criteria in subsection  (B)(2)(a)  of this section allow configurations with pedestrian and vehicular connections at intervals greater than 660 feet, but no greater than 1,000 feet, when the following conditions are present: where topography,  right-of-way , existing construction or physical conditions, or other geographic conditions, prevent compliance or impose an unusual hardship on the  applicant , the  director  may relax the standards, provided the proposed design maximizes pedestrian and vehicular connectivity on the site given the constraints.

    C.   Mixed-Use and Industrial Zones.   New  developments  in  mixed-use  and industrial zones must provide an integrated and connected network of streets to help provide multiple travel route options for all users and comply with the goals and policies of the Anacortes  comprehensive plan .  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.54.030   Open space/parks.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Park-Land Requirement.   Park-land dedication is required for residential  subdivisions  with 10 or more  lots . The  decision-maker  must select one of the following:

      1.   One-tenth of the combined area of  lots  one acre or less in size, exclusive of all other dedications, must be forever dedicated to the public for parks,  open space , or playgrounds. The  decision-maker , in consultation with the Parks  Department , must determine suitable locations for such parks and playgrounds.

      2.   The subdivider creates a property owners’ association for the proposed  subdivision  and deeds to the association land to be held in perpetuity for use as parks,  open space , or playgrounds. The area of land to be deeded to the association must equal the amount that would otherwise have been dedicated to public use.

      3.   The  city  may make an order to be endorsed and certified on the  plat  accepting impact fees per AMC Chapter  3.93  in lieu of dedication of land that would have been dedicated. If the value is not agreed upon between the subdivider and the Administrator, the developer may, at his/her expense, have the value established by a qualified real estate appraiser acceptable to the Administrator.

    B.   Park Design Criteria.   Parks and  open space  integrated into residential  subdivisions  must meet the following design criteria:

      1.   Must be convenient, usable and accessible. All  open spaces  must be physically and visually accessible from the adjacent street or major internal pedestrian route.  Open spaces  must be in locations that the intended user(s) can easily access and use, rather than simply leftover or undevelopable space in locations where very little pedestrian traffic is anticipated or terrain makes access and use difficult. Locations integrated with transit stops, for instance, would be encouraged, as there is likely to be pedestrian traffic in the area.

   Figure 19.54.030(B)(1)
 Examples of accessible parks.

 These parks are located in accessible and centralized locations within the neighborhood. Both parks have accessibility from streets on multiple sides combined with good visibility from adjacent homes.

      2.   Must be inviting. Inviting  open spaces  feature amenities and activities that encourage pedestrians to use and explore the space. On a large scale, it could be a combination of active and passive recreational uses. It could include a children’s play area, special  landscaping  element, or even a comfortable place to sit and watch the world go by. In order for  people  to linger in an  open space , it must be comfortable. For instance, a plaza space should receive ample sunlight, particularly at noon, and have design elements that lend the space a “human scale,” including  landscaping  elements, benches and other seating areas, and pedestrian-scaled lighting. No use must be allowed within the  open space  that adversely affects the aesthetic appeal or usability of the  open space .

   Figure 19.54.030(B)(2)
 Examples of inviting park design.

 Examples of inviting park design, with design features and amenities that attract usage from the surrounding community.

      3.   Must be safe. Safe  open spaces  incorporate Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) principles:

        a.   Natural surveillance—which occurs when parks or plazas are open to view by the public and neighbors. For example, a plaza that features residential  units  with windows looking down on space means that the space has good “eyes” on the park or plaza.

        b.   Lighting that reflects the intended hours of operation and is appropriate for the proposed activities.

        c.    Landscaping  and  fencing . Avoid configurations that create dangerous hiding spaces or minimize views.

        d.   Entrances should be prominent, well lit, and highly visible from inside and outside of the space.

        e.   Maintenance.  Open spaces  must utilize commercial  grade  materials that will last and require minimal maintenance costs.  Walls , where necessary, must be designed and treated to deter graffiti. Use and maintain  landscape  materials that reduce maintenance cost and maintain visibility, where desired.

      4.   Provides for uses/activities that appropriately serve the anticipated residents and users of the  development . For example, common  open space  that serves a variety of functions will attract greater usage. When designing  open spaces , project  applicants  should consider a broad range of age groups, from small children, to teens, parents, and seniors.

      5.   Must be well maintained.  Open space  must be maintained by the land owner(s) unless the  city  or other public authority accepts an offer of dedication.

      6.   May include  LID BMPs .  Open spaces  may include  LID BMPs , like  rain gardens , in up to 25 percent of  subdivision   open spaces  (cumulative).  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.54.040   Lot design.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

   A.   Generally.

      1.    Lots  within  subdivisions  must be designed to allow placement of homes to address functional design issues.  Lots  must be designed to contain a usable  building  area. If the  building  area would be difficult to  develop , the  lot  must be redesigned or eliminated, unless special conditions can be imposed that will ensure the  lot  is developed consistent with the standards of this code and does not create  nonconforming   structures , uses or  lots . Soil analysis which determines  low impact development  infiltration feasibility may affect site designs and home placement.

      2.   The placement and orientation of  lots  and homes should consider privacy, solar orientation, access, location and access to  open space  and other factors that can contribute to the overall livability of the home and its relationship to the surrounding environment. Flexibility is encouraged in spatial orientation of homes on  lots  to address these issues and create interesting and attractive  streetscapes  with homes having a high functional value that might not otherwise occur with a less flexible approach.

      3.   To maximize site efficiency and usable  open space , small  lot   developments  (generally less than 5,000 square feet in area and less than 50 feet wide) are encouraged to utilize the  lot  design standards of this chapter or related design schemes provided they meet access, design, and other applicable standards established in this title.

   B.   General Standards.

      1.   Zero  lot  line, reciprocal use easement  lots , and  shared-access lots   developments  are allowed in all residential zones except Old Town (see AMC  19.42.160  for supplemental form and  setback  standards in Old Town).

      2.    Lot  lines which are contiguous with the  development ’s exterior property line must meet the standard  setback  requirements of Table 19.42.020.

    C.   Zero Lot Line.   This is a configuration where the house and/or  garage  is built up to one of the side property lines within the  development , providing the opportunity for more usable side  setback  space. Standards:

      1.    Dwelling units  and  accessory structures  may be placed on one interior side property line that is part of the  development . The opposite side  setback  must be at least 10 feet. Also see AMC  19.43.030  for small  lot  single- family   development  standards, including minimum usable  open space  requirements.

      2.   Privacy Wall.   In order to maintain privacy, no windows, doors, air conditioning  units , or any other types of openings in the  walls  along a zero  lot  line  structure  are allowed except for windows that do not allow for visibility into the interior side  setback  of the adjacent  lot . Examples include clerestory or obscured windows. See Figure 19.54.040(C) below for an example of a privacy  wall  for a zero  lot  line house.

      3.   Eaves along a zero  lot  line may project a maximum of 18 inches over the interior side property line.

      4.    Lots  intended for zero  lot  line homes must be noted on the  plat , together with minimum side  setback  areas and maximum  building  envelopes.

   Figure 19.54.040(C)
 Zero lot line design.

 Zero  lot  line layout example (left). The right image shows the side  setback  and privacy  wall  for a zero  lot  line house.

    D.   Reciprocal Use Easement Lots.   Reciprocal use easements work similarly to the zero  lot  line configuration. Principal and  accessory structures  must meet the standard  setbacks , and easements are granted on one side to allow use of the side  setback  by the adjacent property (see Figure 19.54.040(D) for an example). Reciprocal use easements may also be used in the rear  setback  to maximize usable  open space .

      1.   Reciprocal easements must be noted on the  plat .

      2.   Privacy Wall.   In order to maintain privacy, no windows, doors, air conditioning  units , or any other types of openings in the  walls  of a  structure  along a reciprocal use easement are allowed except for windows that do not allow for visibility into the side  setback  of the adjacent  lot . Examples include clerestory or obscured windows. See Figure 19.54.040(C) above for an example of a privacy  wall .

      3.   Areas within reciprocal use easements may count towards usable  open space  requirements for applicable  lots  (see AMC  19.43.030 ).

   Figure 19.54.040(D)
 Reciprocal use lots examples.

 Example of a reciprocal side  setback  easement configuration (top image) and reciprocal rear  setback  easement configuration (bottom image).

    E.   Shared-Access Lots.   This includes a series of  lots  clustered around a shared driveway (see AMC  19.53.040 ). Standards:

      1.   Maximum number of  lots  served by a shared-access: six (this includes  lots  fronting the street on either side of the shared-access as shown in Figure 19.54.040(E)).

      2.   Maximum length and width of shared-access: See AMC  19.53.040 .

     3.   Setback Standards and Options for Lots Served by a Shared Driveway.

        a.    Lots  fronting on a  public street  and containing a shared driveway on one side are considered  corner lots  for the purpose of determining  setbacks  (see AMC  19.42.130(B)(2)  for details).

        b.    Garages  facing a shared driveway easement must be set back at least 20 feet from the easement line.

        c.   For  interior lots  featuring a shared driveway and easement extending through one side of the  lot , no street  setback  is required. Such  lots  are subject to interior side  setbacks  on three sides. For the side of the  lot  featuring the access easement, the interior side  setback  is applied from the edge of the easement. The rear  setback  is located opposite the shared driveway.

        d.    Lots  sited at the terminus of a shared driveway easement are exempt from the street  setback  requirement. Such  lots  must meet interior side  setbacks  on three sides and a rear  setback  on one side.

 See Figure 19.54.040(E) for examples of  subdivisions  served by shared driveways and clarification of street, interior, and rear  setbacks .

   Figure 19.54.040(E)
 Examples of shared-access lots.

    F.   Alley Access Lots.   This includes configurations where  lots  are provided with vehicular access by an alley designed per the most recent version of the Anacortes engineering design standards. Standards:

      1.   Alley access  lots  are only allowed where the  lots  front onto a park or trail (on the opposite side of the  lot  from the alley). Dead-end alleys are subject to the turnaround standards of AMC  19.52.050  and through alleys are limited by the maximum  block  length standards of AMC  19.54.020(B) .

      2.   Pedestrian access to each alley access  lot  must be provided by either a  public street  or a pedestrian easement with a sidewalk.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.54.050   Access, services, and utilities.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   Each  lot  in a residential  subdivision  must have access directly to a public  right-of-way , except for:

      1.    Interior lots  served by a shared driveway that complies with the provisions of AMC  19.53.040 .

      2.   Alternative  lot  designs as described in AMC  19.54.040 .

      3.   Any  lot  created that is not adjacent to a public  right-of-way  but that has a right of ingress and egress to that  right-of-way ; provided, that such right has been established as a matter of record in a manner that runs with the land and is irrevocable.

    B.   All driveways must be constructed in compliance with AMC  19.53.030  and the Anacortes engineering design standards.

    C.   Each  lot  in a residential  subdivision  must be provided with adequate provisions for water supplies, sanitary wastewater facilities, storm drainage and  surface water  facilities, electric, and natural gas facilities (if applicable), consistent with the requirements of Anacortes engineering design standards.

    D.   Approval of  subdivisions  may be conditioned upon dedications to the  city  of drainage ways, other public ways, water supplies, sanitary wastewater facilities, parks, playgrounds, and sites for  schools  per RCW  58.17.110  and subject to the provisions of RCW  82.02.020 .  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

	Your Selections

	 What’s Nearby

			 Title

					   18

					 19

					 20

			 Division

					   4

					 5

					 6

			 Chapter

					   19.53

					 19.54

					 19.59

		On This Page

				19.54.010 Purpose

				19.54.020 Block design and connectivity standards

				19.54.030 Open space/parks

				19.54.040 Lot design

				19.54.050 Access, services, and utilities

  The Anacortes Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 5028, passed May 4, 2026.

 Disclaimer: The city attorney’s office has the official version of the Anacortes Municipal Code. Users should contact the city attorney’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited here.

				 City Website: www.anacorteswa.gov
				 City Telephone: (360) 293-1900

	  Hosted by General Code.

			 Privacy Policy
			|
			 Terms of Use
			|
			 Cookie Preferences

				 Contents

					 ×

					 All Publications

					Municipal Code

					Municipal Policies

			   Your Selections

					Anacortes Municipal Code

					Anacortes Municipal Policies

		   Expand All

		   Collapse All

		   Share

		   Clear

					   Close

		 View Full Table

		 View Full Image

		 View Full File

		  ×

			    Go to Top

			    Go to Bottom

			    Share/Save

			 Close

				Save, Share, Bookmark or Print

				History of This Subsection