Title 19 Div. 6 Project Design | Anacortes Municipal Code

 Skip to main content

		Loading…

	 Anacortes, WA

		Municipal Code

				   Home

					   Ch. 19.59

					   Title 19

					   Ch. 19.61

			 Toggle site navigation

			 Menu

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 6, Project Design

						   Home

							   Contents

						   Track

							Legislative History

								Historic Versions

								Pending Updates

								Recent Updates

						   Share

							This Page

							Your Selections

						   Settings

						   Help

		  City of Anacortes

						Municipal Code

  Title 19, Unified Development Code
  Title 19 Div. 6, Project Design

	    Division 6.   Project Design   Revised

			 Search Within This

	   This division is included in your selections.

    Chapter 19.60   INTRODUCTION

			 Search Within This

	   This chapter is included in your selections.

 Sections:

   19.60.010   Purpose.

   19.60.020   Applicability and compliance.

   19.60.030   How the provisions of this division are applied.

    19.60.010   Purpose.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

 This division is authorized by the  City Council  as a major implementation tool of the Anacortes  comprehensive plan . Overall, this division intends to:

    A.   Provide clear objectives for the planning and design of  development  projects in Anacortes.

    B.   Preserve and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Anacortes.

    C.   Promote and accomplish the goals, policies, and objectives of the Anacortes  comprehensive plan .

    D.   Preserve and enhance the historic resources and character of the central business district.

    E.   Ensure that new multifamily,  mixed-use , and commercial  development  is of high quality and appropriate to Anacortes’s character and context.

    F.   Promote increased pedestrian, bicycling, and transit use in commercial and multifamily areas.

    G.   Enhance the livability of residential  developments .

    H.   Enhance the public’s physical and visual access to the water.

    I.   Increase awareness of design considerations among the citizens of Anacortes.

    J.   Maintain and enhance property values within Anacortes.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.60.020   Applicability and compliance.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

    A.   The project design provisions in this division generally apply to all  development  within the  city , including, but not limited to,  building  additions, site improvements, and new signage. However, since each chapter addresses different design and  development  elements, the applicability of each chapter is clarified at the beginning of the chapter.

    B.   Relationship to Other Codes and Documents.   Where provisions of this division conflict with provisions in any other section of the AMC, this division prevails unless otherwise noted.

    C.   For  building  additions, remodels, and site improvements, three different thresholds have been established to determine how the standards herein are applied to such projects. See Figure 19.60.020 for examples of site  development  and the respective types of improvements required under each of the three levels of improvements.

      1.   Level I improvements include all exterior remodels,  building  additions, and/or site improvements that affect the exterior appearance of the  building/site  and/or cumulatively increase the  gross floor area  on a site less than 50 percent within three years of the date of permit issuance. The requirement for such improvements is only that the proposed improvements meet the standards and do not lead to further nonconformance with the standards.

 For example, if a property owner decides to replace a  building   facade ’s siding, then the siding must meet the applicable exterior  building  material standards, but elements such as  building   articulation  would not be required.

      2.   Level II improvements include all improvements that cumulatively increase the  gross floor area  on a site by 50 to 100 percent, within three years of the date of permit issuance. All standards that do not involve repositioning the  building  or reconfiguring site  development  must apply to Level II improvements.

 For example, if a property owner of an existing home in the CBD zone wants to convert the home to a  retail  use and build an addition equaling 75 percent of the current  building ’s footprint, then the following elements must apply:

        a.   The location and design of the addition/remodel must be consistent with AMC Chapter  19.61 ,  Block Frontage  Standards, which addresses  building frontages , entries, parking  lot  location, and street  setback   landscaping . For such  developments  seeking additions to  buildings  where off-street parking location currently does not comply with applicable parking location standards,  building  additions are allowed, provided they do not increase any current nonconformity and generally bring the project closer into conformance with the standards (see AMC Chapter  19.64 , Parking).

        b.   Comply with the standards of AMC Chapter  19.62 , Site Planning.

        c.   Comply with all provisions of AMC Chapter  19.63 ,  Building  Design, except architectural scale and materials provisions related to the existing portion of the  building  where no exterior changes are proposed. All new exterior  wall  areas must comply with  building  elements/details, materials, and  blank wall  treatment standards.

        d.   Comply with the off-street parking,  landscaping , and signage provisions of this division that relate to proposed improvements.

      3.   Level III improvements include all improvements that cumulatively increase the  gross floor area  on a site by more than 100 percent within three years of the date of permit issuance. Such  developments  must conform to all applicable standards, except in a case where there are multiple  buildings  on one site, and only one  building  is being enlarged. In that scenario, improvements to the additional  buildings  are not required, but conformance with all other standards apply.

   Figure 19.60.020
 Examples of improvement types and required compliance.

  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

    19.60.030   How the provisions of this division are applied.

			 Search Within This

	   This section is included in your selections.

 Most sections within the chapters herein include the following elements:

    A.   Purpose statements, which are overarching objectives.

    B.   Standards use words such as “must” and “is/are required,” signifying required actions.

    C.   Guidelines use words such as “should” or “is/are recommended,” signifying voluntary measures.

    D.    Departures  are provided for specific standards. They allow alternative designs, provided the reviewing authority determines the design meets the purpose of the standards and guidelines and other applicable criteria. See AMC  19.20.220  for related procedures associated with  departures .

    E.   This division contains some specific standards that are easily quantifiable, while others provide a level of discretion in how they are complied with. In the latter case, the  applicant  must demonstrate to the  Director , in writing, how the project meets the purpose of the standard or standards.  (Ord. 3040 § 2 (Att. A), 2019)

	Your Selections

	 What’s Nearby

			 Title

					   18

					 19

					 20

			 Division

					   5

					 6

					 7

			 Chapter

					 19.60

					 19.61

		On This Page

				Ch. 19.60 Introduction

				19.60.010 Purpose

				19.60.020 Applicability and compliance

				19.60.030 How the provisions of this division are applied

  The Anacortes Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 5028, passed May 4, 2026.

 Disclaimer: The city attorney’s office has the official version of the Anacortes Municipal Code. Users should contact the city attorney’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited here.

				 City Website: www.anacorteswa.gov
				 City Telephone: (360) 293-1900

	  Hosted by General Code.

			 Privacy Policy
			|
			 Terms of Use
			|
			 Cookie Preferences

				 Contents

					 ×

					 All Publications

					Municipal Code

					Municipal Policies

			   Your Selections

					Anacortes Municipal Code

					Anacortes Municipal Policies

		   Expand All

		   Collapse All

		   Share

		   Clear

					   Close

		 View Full Table

		 View Full Image

		 View Full File

		  ×

			    Go to Top

			    Go to Bottom

			    Share/Save

			 Close

				Save, Share, Bookmark or Print

				History of This Subsection