Chapter 17.98 MODEL HOMES

         Chapter 17.98
MODEL HOMES

             Sections:

              17.98.010    Purpose.

              17.98.020    Number of model home permits authorized.

              17.98.030    Eligibility for a model home permit.

              17.98.040    Application requirements.

              17.98.050    Model homes—Occupancy.

              17.98.060    Model homes as-built submittal.

              17.98.070    Removal.

              17.98.080    Permitted.

              17.98.090    Appeals.

        17.98.010  Purpose.

             Permit a limited number of model homes to be constructed in an approved preliminary subdivision prior to final subdivision approval and recording in accordance with Chapters  16.04  and  16.08 . This chapter shall not be construed to supersede or amend the purpose and intent of the city of Sedro-Woolley Municipal Code regarding the requirements for subdivision approval. (Ord.  1969-20  § 1 (Exh. A), 2020)

        17.98.020  Number of model home permits authorized.

             Building permit applications for model homes may be accepted for a maximum of nine lots. The number of homes permitted for each subdivision shall be no greater than twenty percent of the approved lots within the preliminary plat, not to exceed a total of nine homes. In the event that calculation of the number of lots equal to twenty percent of the total number of preliminary lots creates a fractional lot, the number of permitted lots for model homes shall be rounded up, not to exceed the maximum allowed. (Ord.  1969-20  § 1 (Exh. A), 2020)

        17.98.030  Eligibility for a model home permit.

             Any applicant who has received preliminary plat approval may apply for a building permit or building permits for model homes, up to nine lots authorized under Section  17.98.020  if the following criteria are met:

             A.    The applicant for the model home building permit, if different than the owners and applicant for the approved preliminary plat, shall provide a signed and notarized document by the owner demonstrating that the applicant has real or possessory interest in the property described in the legal description of the approved preliminary plat;

             B.    The applicant has submitted and received approval of civil construction plans;

             C.    Retention/detention facilities that serve the model home lots shall be in place;

             D.    Any road improvement required as a condition of preliminary plat approval which is designed to provide access to the model home from an existing public right-of-way shall be approved for final alignment and subgrade, and the driveway(s) for the model home(s) shall be approved in accordance with the adopted standards and specifications established by the public works department;

             E.    Lot corners shall be staked by a professional registered land surveyor;

             F.    All areas of the subdivision serving the model home(s) have installed frontage improvements as required by the preliminary plat approval or this code, unless waived by the planning director. Said improvements shall meet all ADA requirements;

             G.    Stormwater, water and sewer are installed to each lot proposed for model homes, as directed by the planning department;

             H.    All required streets serving the model homes are constructed to the satisfaction of the public works and fire department. At a minimum, curb and gutter and first lift of asphalt shall be constructed before a building permit for a model home can be issued;

             I.    All impact fees and general facilities charges shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit for the model home(s). Impact fees and general facilities charges may not be deferred for model homes;

             J.    The approved preliminary plat shall not expire within sixty days from the date of building permit application for the model home(s);

             K.    Fire protection to any lot proposed for construction of a model home shall be installed and operational;

             L.    Execution of an agreement with the city saving and holding it harmless from any damages, direct or indirect, as a result of the approval of the construction of model homes on the site; and

             M.    An instrument recorded against the parcels containing the model home(s) stating, “Model home(s) are subject to removal should the preliminary plat not receive final plat approval, or the approval period has expired, consistent with SWMC 17.98.070.” This instrument shall remain in effect until the plat is recorded or the home(s) are removed.

             N.    Buildings installed under a manufactured home permit shall not be eligible as a model home per this chapter. (Ord.  1969-20  § 1 (Exh. A), 2020)

        17.98.040  Application requirements.

             Each residential building permit application for a model home shall include the following submittals:

             A.    Title certificate demonstrating ownership interest in the legal description of the approved preliminary plat;

             B.    Copy of the adopting resolution approving preliminary plat;

             C.    Building plot plan(s) showing the location(s) of the proposed model home(s) with distances indicated from the proposed final plat lot lines;

             D.    Overall site plan showing the location of proposed temporary improvements specific to the model home(s) uses such as the location of signage, flags, banners, fencing, landscaping, and impervious surfaces such as parking areas and sidewalks;

             E.    One dark line print (eleven inches by seventeen inches) of the proposed final plat;

             F.    A statement signed by the applicant in which the applicant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city of Sedro-Woolley, its employees, agents, representatives, and elected and appointed officials from any and all claims made against them arising from the construction or occupancy of the model home(s) prior to recording the final plat;

             G.    Submittal of financial securities at one hundred fifty percent of a contractor’s cost estimate, approved by the city, necessary to restore the site to conditions existing prior to the construction of the model home(s) and all associated structures and improvements;

             H.    In addition to the residential building permit fees for plan check, permit and building permit, a model home base fee of the amount listed in the master fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council per model home shall be required. All other applicable fees shall be paid for the proposed plat improvements and building permit fees prior to individual model home building permit issuance. (Ord.  2013-22  § 53, 2022; Ord.  1969-20  § 1 (Exh. A), 2020)

        17.98.050  Model homes—Occupancy.

             The applicant shall not request final inspection for residential occupancy of a model home prior to final subdivision having been granted final plat approval and recorded. Occupancy as a residence may not be issued until the plat is final and recorded. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a model home used as a sales office prior to final plat recording subject to meeting the life/safety requirements and approval of the planning director. Such improvements shall include completed roads, sidewalks, landscaping, sewer service, water service and street signs. (Ord.  1969-20  § 1 (Exh. A), 2020)

        17.98.060  Model homes as-built submittal.

             Prior to final subdivision approval, the applicant shall submit two copies of a site plan, stamped by a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor, delineating the location of each structure relative to existing and proposed utilities, lot lines, easements, roadways, topography and critical areas. The site plan shall be included in both the building permit record and the subdivision file record. (Ord.  1969-20  § 1 (Exh. A), 2020)

        17.98.070  Removal.

             The model home(s) and all associated improvements, including parking lot shall be removed within six months of the following occurrences:

             A.    Preliminary plat approval has expired, and no extension has been granted.

             B.    The subdivision was denied final plat approval and/or required substantial improvements not consistent with the design of the preliminary approved plat in the opinion of the development services department; and

             C.    The approval period has expired, consistent with Section  16.08.028 . (Ord.  1969-20  § 1 (Exh. A), 2020)

        17.98.080  Permitted.

             The model home(s) may be used for no longer than the expiration of the preliminary plat approval. Upon final plat approval, model homes may be used until the sale of all homes with the approved subdivision. (Ord.  1969-20  § 1 (Exh. A), 2020)

        17.98.090  Appeals.

             Administrative approvals may be appealed in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter  2.90 . (Ord.  1969-20  § 1 (Exh. A), 2020)