Chapter 17.44 GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR ALL ZONES

         Chapter 17.44
GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR ALL ZONES

             Sections:

              17.44.010    Fences.

              17.44.020    Vision clearance triangle.

              17.44.030    Setbacks abutting more restrictive zones.

              17.44.040    Use of public rights-of-way.

              17.44.050    Animals.

              17.44.060    Mobile homes, trailers, and recreational vehicles.

              17.44.070    Shipping containers.

        17.44.010  Fences.

             Fences shall not exceed the following height restrictions:

             A.    Front setback areas: three feet except six feet for open-type fences blocking vision by no more than twenty-five percent;

             B.    Side and rear setback areas except where overlapped by the setback areas: six feet;

             C.    Elsewhere (except vision clearance triangle): same as building height restrictions;

             D.    Barbed wire fences or fences or walls having wire or metal prongs or spikes or cutting points or edges or any kind shall not be allowed in the residential zones. (Ord.  1312-98  § 1 (part), 1998: Ord.  1013  § 3.03, 1985)

        17.44.020  Vision clearance triangle.

             A.    Corner Lots. On any corner lot in which a front yard is required by this title, no wall, fence, or other structure shall be erected, and no hedge, shrub, tree or other growth shall be maintained which will materially impede vision and when a hazard exists between the heights of three feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting street within the triangle formed by the intersecting property lines nearest the streets and a straight line joining such property lines at points which are thirty feet distance from the point of intersection, measured along such property lines. In case of open type fences, blocking, a maximum height of four feet shall prevail within the aforementioned triangular area.

             B.    Driveways and Alleys. On any driveway or alley upon which access is obtained from a public right-of-way, there shall be a vision clearance triangle maintained in which no wall, fence, or other structure shall be erected, and no hedge, shrub, tree or other growth shall be maintained which will materially impede vision and when a hazard exists between the heights of three feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the access and the street. The triangle is measured from the property lines and extends twenty feet parallel to the public right-of-way and ten feet parallel to the driveway or alley. In case of open type fences, blocking, a maximum height of four feet shall prevail within the aforementioned triangular area. (Ord.  1312-98  § 1 (part), 1998: Ord.  1013  § 3.04, 1985)

        17.44.030  Setbacks abutting more restrictive zones.

             Where a zone with more restrictive setback requirements is adjoined without an intervening public right-of-way, setbacks shall be that which is required in the more restrictive zone. (Ord.  1013  § 3.05, 1985)

        17.44.040  Use of public rights-of-way.

             Public rights-of-way shall not be privately used, built upon or obstructed so as to adversely affect their self-explanatory purpose. Private use of public rights-of-way unrelated but not deleterious to such purpose and all work in public rights-of-way undertaken by other than the city government, may occur only with approval of the council, either on a case-by-case basis or through the establishment of uniform policies or regulations. Public rights-of-way have no zoning per se but in the event of vacation shall assume the zoning of the adjoining land to which ownership is ceded. (Ord.  1013  § 3.06, 1985)

        17.44.050  Animals.

             A.    For regulation of farm animals refer to the definition of low-intensity agriculture and the use restrictions of the specific zone.

             B.    For regulation of the number of dogs that can be kept, refer to the definition of kennel and the use restrictions of the specific zone.

             C.    For regulations pertaining to licensing and control of dogs and any more specific animal controls, refer to the specific ordinance.

             D.    Notwithstanding any more specific regulations, no animal shall be kept which creates a nuisance or hazard to the peace, health and welfare of the community in general and neighbors in particular. (Ord.  1013  § 3.07, 1985)

        17.44.060  Mobile homes, trailers, and recreational vehicles.

             A.    Mobile homes not located within a mobile home sales lot shall:

             1.    Consist of at least two fully enclosed parallel sections each of not less than twelve feet wide by thirty-six feet long;

             2.    Be placed on a poured or permanent concrete block foundation similar to that required for other residential construction;

             3.    Have a roof which was originally constructed and is now pitched with a slope no less than three inches of rise to twelve inches of run, is constructed as an integral part of the home, and is made of either composition, shakes or shingles;

             4.    Have exterior siding similar in appearance to siding materials commonly used on conventional site-built (per Uniform Building Code) single-family residences;

             5.    Have the tongue removed if designed to allow removal;

             6.    Have a minimum of eighteen inches crawl space;

             7.    Have permanent steps affixed to all exits; and

             8.    Be approved by and bear the insignia of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

             B.    No trailer or recreational vehicle shall be occupied as a residence for more than thirty days within the space of one year unless approved in accordance with Chapter  17.64 . (Ord.  1206  § 1, 1994: Ord.  1013  § 3.08, 1985)

        17.44.070  Shipping containers.

             Shipping containers placed on any site shall comply with the provisions of this section.

             Exception: Portable moving containers/moving pods placed on private property for no more than thirty days in any twelve-month period shall not be regulated by this chapter.

             A.    Residential Zones. Shipping containers are not allowed in residential zones (Residential-5, Residential-7 or Residential-15). A temporary permit for a shipping container may be obtained per Chapter  17.64  for containers used ancillary to a project with a valid residential building permit. A temporary permit may allow placement of a container at a residential building site for up to one hundred eighty days for temporary storage after the building permit is issued. The temporary permit cannot be extended.

             B.    Industrial Zone.

             1.    Shipping containers are allowed in the industrial zone; provided, that the use is in conformance with current permitted zoning uses. Placement of a shipping container for permanent or semipermanent use shall require a building permit and shall have an engineered foundation and meet all other codes for placement on the property.

             2.    Shipping containers are not allowed on industrially zoned properties on which the primary use is a nonconforming residential use unless a temporary permit is obtained per Chapter  17.64 .

             C.    Mixed Commercial Zone and Central Business District.

             1.    Shipping containers are allowed in the mixed commercial zone and central business district, provided said containers:

             a.    Are screened with sight-obscuring fencing or landscaping approved by the planning department; and

             b.    Are being used as a shipping container and that all applicable Department of Transportation (DOT) licenses for the containers are active and valid. The city may require proof of active DOT licenses; and

             c.    Are not permanently installed.

             2.    Shipping containers are not allowed in the central business district or mixed commercial zone when the primary use is a nonconforming residential use. A temporary permit for a shipping container may be obtained per Chapter  17.64  for containers used ancillary to a project with a valid building permit. A temporary permit may allow placement of a container at a building site for up to one hundred eighty days for temporary storage after the building permit is issued. The temporary permit cannot be extended.

             D.    Shipping containers are allowed on construction sites in the central business district, mixed commercial and industrial zones where there is an active building permit if ancillary to a project with a valid commercial building permit. A temporary permit may allow placement of a container at a commercial building site for up to one year for temporary storage after the building permit is issued. The temporary placement permit may be extended up to an additional one hundred eighty days by the building official.

             E.    Look-alike shipping container buildings or metal buildings marketed as “containers” or “portable storage units” are regulated as shipping containers to which this section shall apply.

             F.    Placing a shipping container on a city street or right-of-way is not allowed. (Ord.  1694-10  § 2, 2010)