Chapter 19.63 SIGNS

         Chapter 19.63
SIGNS

             Sections:

              19.63.010    Purpose.

              19.63.020    General provisions.

              19.63.030    Permanent identification signs for commercial, business, tourists and industrial developments.

              19.63.040    Off-premises signs.

              19.63.050    Permit required – Application.

              19.63.060    Removal and disposition of certain signs.

              19.63.070    Appeals.

        19.63.010  Purpose.

             (1) The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and maintain the small-town quality and the unique historic character of the town. It is to promote and protect the public welfare, health, safety and aesthetics by regulating existing and proposed signs.

             (2) Sign design shall be a creative response to the location on which it is to be placed. It shall consider:

             (a) Scale compatibility and visual appropriateness with both the natural beauty of the environment and the unique building-scape of the town;

             (b) Symbolic appropriateness with the activity to which it pertains;

             (c) Expressive identity of individual proprietors, yet never violating the visual character of the surroundings in which it is to be placed;

             (d) Legibility at the distance and pace (speed) at which it is to be seen;

             (e) Undue blocking of public view from the public right-of-way;

             (f) Reduction of distractions contributing to traffic confusion or accidents. [Ord. 513, 2003; Ord. 426 § 10.63.010, 1998]

        19.63.020  General provisions.

             (1) Signs Subject to State Approval. All signs within the state right-of-way shall be subject to approval of the State Department of Transportation. Where the regulations of the town and state differ, the more restrictive regulations shall govern.

             (2) Sign Clearances. A minimum of eight feet above sidewalks and 15 feet above driveways shall be provided under freestanding or projecting signs.

             (3) Setbacks. Signs shall be situated in a manner so as not to adversely affect safety, corner vision, public rights-of-way, improvements or future improvements, easements, or other similar conditions.

             (4) Blanketing. No sign shall be situated in a manner which results in obscuring or blocking an existing sign as viewed from adjacent right-of-way.

             (5) Maintenance. All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and be maintained in a safe condition. All signs and the site upon which they are located shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and attractive condition. Signs shall be kept free from rust, corrosion, peeling paint, or other surface deterioration. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted.

             (6) Pre-Existing Signs. Signs and sign structures existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, which complied with applicable regulations existing when the sign was established but which do not comply with one or more of the requirements of this chapter, shall be subject to the provisions of this title for nonconforming uses.

             (a) Alteration to a nonconforming sign which reduces or does not increase its noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, including changes in display surface, sign area, height                   and setback, may be allowed subject to review by the planner.

             (b) Sign copy which identifies or advertises a business, product or service no longer located on the same site or premises on which the sign is posted shall be replaced, or removed, within one month of the change in occupancy or vacancy of the premises. Failure to use the copy area of a nonconforming sign for purposes permitted under this section for a period of more than 12 consecutive months shall constitute a discontinuance of a nonconforming use and such sign shall be removed or modified to satisfy all applicable requirements of this title and the underlying district. [Ord. 513, 2003; Ord. 426 § 10.63.020, 1998]

        19.63.030  Permanent identification signs for commercial, business, tourists and industrial developments.

             (1) Freestanding signs are signs supported by uprights extending from the ground, not attached to a building. Height of freestanding signs shall not exceed nine feet and freestanding signs shall not exceed twenty square feet in area each side, including support structure. The height of freestanding signs is measured from the grade at the edge of the right-of-way to the top of the sign. If unusual topography, architectural or landscape elements, building setting or road curvature merit special considerations, an exemption may be considered.

             (2) Ground-mounted signs may be used in lieu of a freestanding identification sign. In such case, the requirements for size, number, and setback/location for freestanding signs shall apply.

             (3) Supplementary Identification. In addition, ground-mounted signs may be used to identify individual uses within a multi-tenant development which are not otherwise identified on a freestanding sign(s) for the development. Ground-mounted signs shall be subject to the following requirements:

             (a) Height. A ground-mounted sign (also called monument signs) shall not exceed a height of six feet.

             (b) Maximum size: 36 square feet.

             (c) Number. Only one ground-mounted sign shall be allowed for a business, and shall be situated in front of that business.

             (d) Setbacks/Location. All ground-mounted signs shall be located within a landscaped area, with curbing located at least three feet from the base of the sign on all sides, except next to a sidewalk. Ground-mounted signs shall be situated at least 50 feet from any freestanding sign, and at least 100 feet from any other ground-mounted sign within the same development. Ground-mounted signs shall not be located within a 20-foot radius of the corner of any two streets, or the street and any driveway.

             (e) Materials. Ground-mounted signs shall incorporate colors and materials which are the same, or substantially the same, as those used on the building identified by the sign.

             (f) Illumination. Such signs may be internally or indirectly illuminated.

             (4) On-building signs identifying the use of the premises shall be allowed subject to the following conditions:

             (a) Sign Area. The sign area, location of the building, number of signs, and the size of the copy used shall be determined in consideration of the following factors:

             (i) The relationship of the building to the road or on-site circulation areas;

             (ii) The use and location of a freestanding or ground-mounted sign identifying the premises, including on-site identification signs approved under this code;

             (iii) The use of the premises and associated need for identification of the building;

             (iv) The size and design of the building elevation on which the sign would be placed;

             (v) The amount of signing for the use which can be seen from a given direction;

             (vi) Wall signs and marquee signs shall not exceed a total sign area of two square feet per lineal foot of building frontage; except that if a business has only a wall sign, the sign area allowed shall be at least 60 square feet regardless of frontage;

             (vii)  Projecting signs shall be limited to one per street frontage and shall not exceed an area of 25 feet per sign face.

             (b) Business and Commercial District. Signs located on buildings within the business and commercial district may project over the sidewalk or an alley (within the right-of-way), provided such signs have at least eight feet of vertical clearance from the sidewalk to the bottom of the sign, or 15 feet of clearance from an alley to the bottom of the sign.

             (c) Wall Graphics. The use of exterior walls of buildings for graphics, art work, or other displays shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission.

             (d) Illumination. On-building signs may be internally or indirectly illuminated, or backlit.

             (5) Electronic Message Center Signs. Electronic message center signs and other changeable copy signs may be incorporated into a permanent identification sign for a business or development, subject to review and approval by the planning commission. Approval shall not be granted unless the following conditions are satisfied:

             (a) Only one sign shall be used in a development;

             (b) The changeable copy sign, or electronic message center, shall be included in the maximum sign area allowed per this code, and shall not exceed 80 percent of the total sign area;

             (c) The sign shall be integrated into the design of the identification signs, and shall satisfy the design standards under this code;

             (d) Electronic message centers and changeable copy signs may be used only to advertise activities conducted or goods and services available on the property on which the sign is located, or to present public service information;

             (e) No segmented message shall last longer than 15 seconds.

             (6) Community and Civic Signs and Banners. The intent of this provision is to provide a location for information on community and civic organized events occurring in the town of Concrete. Such structure may be allowed for displaying signs and/or banners, subject to the following:

             (a) Cannot be placed on Washington State Department of Transportation highway right-of-way.

             (b) Structure can be no more than 20 feet in length, width, or height.

             (c) Shall be limited to 150 square feet in area.

             (d) Can only be installed and maintained by the town of Concrete. The town of Concrete shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of any structure and any signs or banners attached thereof.

             (e) Signs or banners displayed must be for civic events or nonprofit activities and cannot contain commercial advertising or sponsorships.

             (f) Signs or banners are limited to a maximum size of 10 feet in length and two and one-half feet in height and be read legibly at the distance and pace (speed) at which it is to be seen and shall be limited to the following:

             (i) Name of event;

             (ii) Date/s of event;

             (iii) Time of event;

             (iv) Event logo or other event related image/s.

             (g) Signs or banners are to be placed by town staff and only after approval either by a town of Concrete events application or other council-approved form for nonevents.

             (h) Signs or banners may be placed no more than 21 days prior to the event and must be removed immediately following the end of the event and shall not be in place for more than a total of 120 days.

             (i) The town shall have the authority to remove and dispose of any sign or banner that is placed without prior authorization or that does not meet the criteria within this section. [Ord. 850, 2022; Ord. 513, 2003; Ord. 426 § 10.63.030, 1998]

        19.63.040  Off-premises signs.

             Off-premises signs shall not be allowed except as herein provided:

             (1) Billboards (Outdoor Advertising Structures). No new billboards shall be allowed in any zoning district without the approval of the planning commission. Due to the perplexity of billboard signage, the maximum size shall be determined by the planning commission based on location and zoning.

             (2) Political Signs. Signs which support or oppose ballot measures, persons running for political office and other issues subject to a vote by the public may be allowed subject to the following conditions:

             (a) Approval of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be placed;

             (b) Location. Such signs shall not be posted in state, county or town rights-of-way, on telephone poles, traffic signs, or other public apparatus. Such signs shall observe the corner vision requirements of this chapter, and shall not be situated in a manner which creates a hazard;

             (c) Size. Signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in size as viewed from one direction;

             (d) Time Limit. Such signs shall not be posted more than four months before the affected election, and shall be removed within one week after the election for which the sign is posted;

             (e) If it becomes necessary that the town has to remove signs, there will be a cost billed to the candidate or sponsoring agency.

             (3) Temporary Directional Signs. The intent of this provision is to allow the infrequent, and not the regular, use of signs of a temporary nature. Off-premises directional signs of a temporary nature such as those used to direct persons to open houses, garage sales, or special events of short (two days) duration may be allowed subject to the following conditions:

             (a) Any such sign within the state right-of-way shall be subject to approval by the State Department of Transportation.

             (b) All such signs shall comply with conditions (a) through (c) and (e) under subsection (2) of this section.

             (c) Time Limit. All such signs shall be removed at the end of the day on which the event, open house or garage sale is conducted and shall not be used repeatedly, contrary to the stated intent.

             (d) The town shall have the authority to immediately remove and dispose of any such sign found to be in violation of this subsection.

             (4) Permanent Off-Premises Directional Signs. The intent of this provision is to provide directional and location information to the general public about places of general interest, such as tourist information services, school or public recreational facilities, central business or other special districts, historic sites, and regional developments; or to provide information of a general community nature, such as those found at town entrance locations identifying the town and historic dates, or listing local service clubs and organizations. Such signs may be allowed, subject to planning commission review, subject to the following:

             (a) Any such signs within the state right-of-way shall be subject to approval by the Department of Transportation;

             (b) Approval of the owner of the property on which sign is to be placed;

             (c) Location. Any such sign shall not be placed where it may cause a hazard, or obstruct the vision of any driver;

             (d) Size shall be no larger than necessary to clearly inform or direct the public. Town identification/community service club type signs shall not exceed 50 square feet per side;

             (e) Illumination. May be indirectly illuminated;

             (f) Design. All such signs shall be designed using materials, colors, lettering and other graphics which will be, in the opinion of the planning commission, an asset to the community and in the best interest of the town and the general public.

             (5) Town Center Business Signs. The intent of this provision is to provide a central location for directional and location information for businesses and organizations located in the town of Concrete’s Main Street business core. Such signs may be allowed, subject to the planning commission review, subject to the following:

             (a) The town of Concrete will maintain a freestanding structure at the entrance to the Town Center in which signs for all Main Street merchants and organizations may be displayed.

             (b) All enterprise is entitled to an equal share of the sign space including the building name.

             (c) All signs shall be designed using materials, colors, lettering and other graphics which will be, in the opinion of the town council, in compliance with any criteria set by the Concrete Municipal Code for this structure.

             (d) In order to provide uniformity, individual signs shall be the same in length and height. Businesses retain the option of adding their business name, phone number or any other information as requested by the business owner, keeping in mind the more information the smaller the lettering.

             (e) The cost of each individual sign shall be paid by the business requesting a sign be displayed.

             (f) An initial permit fee, plus an annual fee, will be set by the town council by annual resolution* in order to provide and maintain the main structure.

             (g) If the annual fee is not paid by January 31st of that billing year a late fee as set by annual resolution shall be charged on those businesses with established signs.

             (h) If the annual fee plus any accrued late fees are not paid in full by May 31st of that billing year said sign may be removed and said business may request to be placed back on the sign following the same initial procedures and initial fees as the original sign. [Ord. 679, 2011; Ord. 513, 2003; Ord. 426 § 10.63.040, 1998]

             *Code reviser’s note: The resolution setting this fee is available for review at Town Hall.

        19.63.050  Permit required – Application.

             A permit shall be obtained for each sign erected within the town limits, excepting those signs which are exempted by ordinance. Each permit application shall be filed with the town clerk-treasurer by the property owner, lessee, contract purchaser or other persons entitled to possession of the property, or by an authorized agent, on a form provided by the town, and shall contain and include the following:

             (1) Building name and location;

             (2) Building owner and lessee, sign owner and sign lessee, name of business, primary product and/or service;

             (3) Location of existing and proposed signs;

             (4) Description of signs, including dimensions, materials and copy material;

             (5) Required fee;

             (6) Name, address and telephone number of sign installer. [Ord. 513, 2003; Ord. 426 § 10.63.040, 1998]

        19.63.060  Removal and disposition of certain signs.

             (1) Abandoned Signs. Any sign that is located on property that is vacant and unoccupied for a period of six months or more; pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies; or advertises products, services, or facilities which have not been available to the public for a period of six months shall be deemed abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership, management, or seasonal closure shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant six months or more. Abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of the premises. Signage depicting incorrect information such as the name of the business, hours of operation, phone numbers and addresses shall be removed immediately.

             (2) Dangerous or Defective Signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any property owned by them any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or the owner of the sign. Upon failure of the owner to remove or repair a dangerous or defective sign, the building inspector and/or town planner or their designee shall proceed as described in subsection (3) of this section.

             (3) Removal of Signs. The town planner or building inspector or their designee shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety, such as signs that are abandoned or dangerous structurally, materially, or electrically. The building inspector, town planner or their designee shall send a notice by certified mail to the owner of the property on which the sign is located specifying the violation involved. If the sign is not removed or the violation not corrected within 30 days from the date of the mailing, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to the last known address and posted on the sign or premises.

             (4) Appeals. The determination of the town planner, building inspector or their designee ordering removal or compliance may be appealed by filing written notice with the planning or building departments within 10 days after receipt of notice.

             (5) Immediate Removal of Dangerous Signs. In cases of imminent danger to public safety, the town planner, building inspector or their designee may cause immediate removal of a dangerous sign without notice.

             (6) Disposal of Signs – Costs. Any sign removed by an agent of the town pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the town and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate. The cost of removal shall be considered a debt owed to the town by the sign owner or property owner and may be recovered in court action or result in a lien against the property. [Ord. 881, 2024]

        19.63.070  Appeals.

             Any aggrieved party dissatisfied with a permitting decision may appeal the decision to the Concrete town council. [Ord. 881, 2024; Ord. 513, 2003; Ord. 426 § 10.63.040, 1998. Formerly 19.63.060]